<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <title>Zhuangzi</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="home.css" />
        <link rel="shortcut icon" type="image/png" href="yin-yang.png" />
    </head>
    <body>
        <!--#include virtual="menu.xhtml" -->
        <section><h2><a href="https://github.com/differsc/Zhuangzi-and-taoism">our github link</a></h2>
        <p>All the files of our website is in our github repository.</p>
        </section>
        <section>
            <h2>Who was Zhuangzi?</h2>
            <p>Zhuangzi was a Taoist philosopher active during the late Warring States Period, whose
                approach to Taoism was contradictory, absurd, and at times humorous pointing out the
                futility of the search for deeper meaning. This line of thought came largely as a
                reaction to the Confucianist dogma of the time, which promoted rigorous
                traditionalism as the way of the Tao. Zhuangzi thought this to be ridiculous, and
                set out through his writings to teach Taoism in a much more relative way.</p>
        </section>
        <section>
            <h2>Corpus:</h2>
            <p>We selected the first nine chapters of The Zhuangzi for markup, using a translation
                by Oxford linguist James Legge (1815-97) found <a
                    href="https://ctext.org/zhuangzi/zhs">here</a>. These passages are known
                collectively as the 'inner chapters' of The Zhuangzi, because they are generally
                agreed upon by scholars to actually be written by Zhuangzi, and not a student or
                follower. We also included selected passages from Confucius, chosen for their
                succinct presentation of Confucian ideals.</p>
        </section>
        <section>
            <h2>Project:</h2>
            <p>Our goal with our project was to understand and quantify the linguistic techniques
                used by Zhuangzi in relation to the philosophical points he makes in his work, as
                well as how he argues these topics.</p>
        </section>
        <section>
            <h2>Team:</h2>
            <h3>Hanwen</h3>
            <p>Hanwen is a senior majoring in Material Science and Engineering and minoring in
                German. He has been interested in Chinese philosophy from a young age.</p>
            <h3>Sam</h3>
            <p>Sam is a junior majoring in History of Art and Architecture and minoring in Museum
                Studies and Swedish. He became interested in Zhuangzi after reading select passages
                for a philosophy class.</p>
        </section>
    </body>
</html>
