<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <title>Zhuangzi</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="home.css" />
        <link rel="shortcut icon" type="image/png" href="yin-yang.png" />
    </head>
    <body>
        <!--#include virtual="menu.xhtml" -->
        <h2>Analysis:</h2>
        <section>
            <h3>Graph 1</h3>
            <p>The percentage of figurative lanugage per chapter ranged between around 3 and 12
                percent, with higher percentages found in chapters that featured more parables and
                less arguments.</p>
        </section>
        <section>
            <h3>Graph 2</h3>
            <p>The only chapters with significant topical focus are Chapter 2: The Adjustment of
                Controversies and Chapter 4: Man in the World, Associated With Other Men. As the
                name implies, chapter 4 consists largely of anecdotes from conversations between
                friends, politicians, and scholars, generally concerning the mind and body. Since
                conversations are more literal than parables, and must be more directly about
                something, this could be why we see such a large topcial focus. Another attributable
                cause to this discrepancy in amount of topical focus is the difference in markup
                between members of this project.</p>
        </section>
        <section>
            <h3>Graph 3</h3>
            <p>Across the board, simile and metaphor comprised vast majority of figurative language
                Zhuangzi used. This is consistent with the style in which he constructs his
                arguments, wherein things that may not at all be like one another are implied to be
                identical, effectively neutralizing the meaning brought on through the comparison of
                the two.</p>
        </section>
        <section>
            <h3>Final Thoughts</h3>
            <p>Admittedly, it is possible our results and the conclusions we drew from them are
                incomplete or inaccurate. The underlying themes of the Zhuangzi have been discussed
                for millenia, and are not always easily identifiable through the structure and
                literal meaning of the words presented (especially given our limited experience and
                allowed time to sit with the translation). An inherent quality of translations is
                that they are entirely new documents which inevitably must carry different meaning
                than the source material, no matter how small. This calls into question the extent
                to which we may extrapolate our findings.</p>
        </section>
    </body>
</html>
