<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <title>Zhuangzi</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="home.css" />
        <script type="text/javascript" src="corpus.js"></script>
        <link rel="shortcut icon" type="image/png" href="yin-yang.png" />
    </head>
    <body>
        <div class="floating-window">
            <div class="button-container">
                <button id="button">Toolbar</button>
            </div>
            <div class="toolbar">
                <h4>Highlights</h4>
                <ul class="buttons">
                    <li><b>Figurative language</b><ul>
                            <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" id="figu-1" name="figu-1"
                                 />simile<br /></li>
                            <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" id="figu-2" name="figu-2"
                                 />metaphor<br /></li>
                            <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" id="figu-3" name="figu-3"
                                 />irony<br /></li>
                            <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" id="figu-4" name="figu-4"
                                 />symbolism<br /></li>
                            <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" id="figu-5" name="figu-5"
                                 />personificatio<br /></li>
                            <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" id="figu-6" name="figu-6"
                                 />hyperbole<br /></li>
                            <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" id="figu-7" name="figu-7"
                                 />idiom<br /></li>
                        </ul>
                    </li>
                    <li><b>Positive/Negative</b><ul>
                            <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" id="P" name="P"
                                 />Positive<br /></li>
                            <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" id="N" name="N"
                                 />Negative<br /></li>
                        </ul>
                    </li>
                    <li><b>Reference</b><ul>
                            <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" id="ref-1" name="ref-1"
                                 />historical<br /></li>
                            <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" id="ref-2" name="ref-2"
                                 />geographic<br /></li>
                            <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" id="ref-3" name="ref-3"
                                 />direct-quote<br /></li>
                            <li class="buttons"><input type="checkbox" id="ref-4" name="ref-4"
                                 />indirect-quote<br /></li>
                        </ul>
                    </li>
                    <li><input type="checkbox" id="Par" name="Par" /><b>Paradox</b>
                    </li>
                    <li><input type="checkbox" id="com" name="com" /><b>Comparison</b>
                    </li>

                    <li><input type="checkbox" id="rhe" name="rhe" /><b>Rhetorical</b>
                    </li>
                    <li><input type="checkbox" id="speech" name="speech" /><b>Speech</b>
                    </li>
                </ul>
            </div>
        </div>
        <h1><a class="title" id="contents">Contents</a></h1>
        <ul class="titles">
            <li><a class="title" href="#chapter1">Enjoyment In Untroubled Ease (1)</a></li>
            <li><a class="title" href="#chapter2">The Adjustment of Controversies (2)</a></li>
            <li><a class="title" href="#chapter3">Nourishing the Lord of Life (3)</a></li>
            <li><a class="title" href="#chapter4">Man in the World, Associated with other Men
                    (4)</a></li>
            <li><a class="title" href="#chapter5">The Seal of Virtue Complete (5)</a></li>
            <li><a class="title" href="#chapter6">The Great and Most Honoured Master (6)</a></li>
            <li><a class="title" href="#chapter7">The Normal Course for Rulers and Kings
                (7)</a></li>
        </ul>
        <hr />
        <h1><a class="title" href="#contents" id="chapter1">Chapter 1:Enjoyment In Untroubled
                Ease</a></h1>
        <section>


            <p>In the Northern Ocean there is a fish, the name of which is Kun - I do not know how
                many li in size. It changes into a bird with the name of Peng, the back of which is
                (also) - I do not know how many li in extent. When this bird rouses itself and
                flies, its wings are like clouds all round the sky. When the sea is moved (so as to
                bear it along), it prepares to remove to the Southern Ocean. The Southern Ocean is
                the Pool of Heaven.</p>

            <p><em class="historical">There is the (book called) Qi Xie, a record of marvels. We
                    have in it these words: 'When the peng is removing to the Southern Ocean it
                    flaps (its wings) on the water for 3000 li. Then it ascends on a whirlwind
                    90,000 li, and it rests only at the end of six months.'</em> (But similar to
                this is the movement of the breezes which we call) the horses of the fields, of the
                dust (which quivers in the sunbeams), and of living things as they are blown against
                one another by the air.<span class="rhetorical">Is its azure the proper colour of
                    the sky?</span> Or is it occasioned by its distance and illimitable extent? If
                one were looking down (from above), the very same appearance would just meet his
                view.</p>

            <p> And moreover, (to speak of) the accumulation of water; if it be not great, it will
                not have strength to support a large boat. Upset a cup of water in a cavity, and a
                straw will float on it as if it were a boat. Place a cup in it, and it will stick
                fast; the water is shallow and the boat is large. (So it is with) the accumulation
                of wind; if it be not great, it will not have strength to support great wings.
                Therefore (the peng ascended to) the height of 90,000 li, and there was such a mass
                of wind beneath it; thenceforth the accumulation of wind was sufficient. As it
                seemed to bear the blue sky on its back, and there was nothing to obstruct or arrest
                its course, it could pursue its way to the South.</p>

            <p>A cicada and a little dove laughed at it, saying, <span class="speech"
                    title="Cicada and Dove">'We make an effort and fly towards an elm or sapanwood
                    tree; and sometimes before we reach it, we can do no more but drop to the
                    ground. Of what use is it for this (creature) to rise 90,000 li, and make for
                    the South?'</span> He who goes to the grassy suburbs, returning to the third
                meal (of the day), will have his belly as full as when he set out; he who goes to a
                distance of 100 li will have to pound his grain where he stops for the night; he who
                goes a thousand li, will have to carry with him provisions for three months. What
                should these two small creatures know about the matter? <span class="comparison">The
                    knowledge of that which is small does not reach to that which is great; (the
                    experience of) a few years does not reach to that of many.</span>
                <span class="rhetorical">How do we know that it is so?</span> The mushroom of a
                morning does not know (what takes place between) the beginning and end of a month;
                the short-lived cicada does not know (what takes place between) the spring and
                autumn. These are instances of a short term of life. In the south of <em
                    class="geographic">Chu</em> there is the (tree) called Ming-ling, whose spring
                is 500 years, and its autumn the same; in high antiquity there was that called
                Da-chun, whose spring was 8000 years, and its autumn the same. And Peng Zu is the
                one man renowned to the present day for his length of life: <span class="rhetorical"
                    >if all men were (to wish) to match him, would they not be miserable?</span></p>



            <p>In the questions put by Tang to Ji we have similar statements:<span class="speech"
                    title="Tang">'In the bare and barren north there is the dark and vast ocean -
                    the Pool of Heaven. In it there is a fish, several thousand li in breadth, while
                    no one knows its length. Its name is the kun. There is (also) a bird named the
                    peng; its back is like the Tai mountain, while its wings are like clouds all
                    round the sky. <span class="figurative" style="simile">On a whirlwind it mounts
                        upwards as on the whorls of a goat's horn</span> for 90,000 li, till, far
                    removed from the cloudy vapours, <span class="figurative" style="symbolism">it
                        bears on its back the blue sky</span>, and then it shapes its course for the
                    South, and proceeds to the ocean there.' A quail by the side of a marsh laughed
                    at it, and said, 'Where is it going to? I spring up with a bound, and come down
                    again when I have reached but a few fathoms, and then fly about among the
                    brushwood and bushes; and this is the perfection of flying. Where is that
                    creature going to?</span>' This shows the difference between the small and the
                great.</p>



            <p>Thus it is that men, whose wisdom is sufficient for the duties of some one office, or
                whose conduct will secure harmony in some one district, or whose virtue is befitting
                a ruler so that they could efficiently govern some one state, are sure to look on
                themselves in this manner (like the quail), and yet Rongzi of Song would have smiled
                and laughed at them. (This Rongzi), <span class="figurative" style="hyperbole"
                    >though the whole world should have praised him</span>, would not for that have
                stimulated himself to greater endeavour, and <span class="figurative"
                    style="hyperbole">though the whole world should have condemned him</span>, would
                not have exercised any more repression of his course; so fixed was he in the
                difference between the internal (judgment of himself) and the external (judgment of
                others), so distinctly had he marked out the bounding limit of glory and disgrace.
                Here, however, he stopped. <span class="figurative" style="personification">His
                    place in the world indeed had become indifferent to him</span>, but still he had
                not planted himself firmly (in the right position). There was Liezi, who rode on the
                wind and pursued his way, with an admirable indifference (to all external things),
                returning, however, after fifteen days, (to his place). In regard to the things that
                (are supposed to) contribute to happiness, he was free from all endeavours to obtain
                them; but though he had not to walk, there was still something for which he had to
                wait. But suppose one who mounts on (the ether of) heaven and earth in its normal
                operation, and drives along the six elemental energies of the changing (seasons),
                thus enjoying himself in the illimitable - what has he to wait for? Therefore it is
                said, 'The Perfect man has no (thought of) self; the Spirit-like man, none of merit;
                the Sagely-minded man, none of fame.' </p>



            <p> Yao, proposing to resign the throne to Xu You, said, <span class="speech"
                    title="Yao">'When the sun and moon have come forth, if the torches have not been
                    put out, would it not be difficult for them to give light? When the seasonal
                    rains are coming down, if we still keep watering the ground, will not our toil
                    be labour lost for all the good it will do? Do you, Master, stand forth (as
                    sovereign), and the kingdom will (at once) be well governed. If I still
                    (continue to) preside over it, I must look on myself as vainly occupying the
                    place - I beg to resign the throne to you.'</span> Xu You said, <span
                    class="speech" title="Xu You">'You, Sir, govern the kingdom, and the kingdom is
                    well governed. If I in these circumstances take your place, shall I not be doing
                    so for the sake of the name? But the name is but the guest of the reality; shall
                    I be playing the part of the guest? The tailor-bird makes its nest in the deep
                    forest, but only uses a single branch; the mole drinks from the He, but only
                    takes what fills its belly. Return and rest in being ruler - I will have nothing
                    to do with the throne. Though the cook were not attending to his kitchen, the
                    representative of the dead and the officer of prayer would not leave their cups
                    and stands to take his place.'</span></p>



            <p>Jian Wu asked Lian Shu, saying, <span class="speech" title="Jian Wu">'I heard Jie Yu
                    talking words which were great, but had nothing corresponding to them (in
                    reality); once gone, they could not be brought back. I was frightened by them;
                    they were like the Milky Way which cannot be traced to its beginning or end.
                    They had no connexion with one another, and were not akin to the experiences of
                    men.'</span>
                <span class="speech" title="Lian Shu">'What were his words?'</span> asked Lian Shu,
                and the other replied, (He said) that<span class="speech" title="Jian Wu"> 'Far away
                    on the hill of Gu Ye there dwelt a Spirit-like <span class="figurative"
                        style="simile">man whose flesh and skin were (smooth) as ice and (white) as
                        snow</span>; that his <span class="figurative" style="simile">manner was
                        elegant and delicate as that of a virgin;</span> that he did not eat any of
                    the five grains, but inhaled the wind and drank the dew; that he mounted on the
                    clouds, drove along the flying dragons, rambling and enjoying himself beyond the
                    four seas; that by the concentration of his spirit-like powers he could save men
                    from disease and pestilence, and secure every year a plentiful harvest.'</span>
                These words appeared to me wild and incoherent and I did not believe them. <span
                    class="speech" title="Lian Shu">'So it is,'</span> said Lian Shu. <span
                    class="speech" title="Lian Shu">'The blind have no perception of the beauty of
                    elegant figures, nor the deaf of the sound of bells and drums. But is it only
                    the bodily senses of which deafness and blindness can be predicated? There is
                    also a similar defect in the intelligence; and of this your words supply an
                    illustration in yourself. That man, with those attributes, though all things
                    were one mass of confusion, and he heard in that condition the whole world
                    crying out to him to be rectified, would not have to address himself laboriously
                    to the task, as if it were his business to rectify the world. Nothing could hurt
                    that man; the greatest floods, reaching to the sky, could not drown him, nor
                    would he feel the fervour of the greatest heats melting metals and stones till
                    they flowed, and scorching all the ground and hills. From the dust and chaff of
                    himself, he could still mould and fashion Yaos and Shuns - <span
                        class="rhetorical">how should he be willing to occupy himself with
                        things?</span>'</span> A man of Song, who dealt in the ceremonial caps (of
                Yin), went with them to Yue, the people of which cut off their hair and tattooed
                their bodies, so that they had no use for them. Yao ruled the people of the kingdom,
                and maintained a perfect government within the four seas. Having gone to see the
                four (Perfect) Ones on the distant hill of Gu Ye, when (he returned to his capital)
                on the south of the Fen water, his throne appeared no more to his deep-sunk
                oblivious eyes.</p>



            <p>Huizi told Zhuangzi, saying,<span class="speech" title="Huizi">'The king of Wei sent
                    me some seeds of a large calabash, which I sowed. The fruit, when fully grown,
                    could contain five piculs (of anything). I used it to contain water, but it was
                    so heavy that I could not lift it by myself. I cut it in two to make the parts
                    into drinking vessels; but the dried shells were too wide and unstable and would
                    not hold (the liquor); nothing but large useless things! Because of their
                    uselessness I knocked them to pieces.'</span> Zhuangzi replied, <span
                    class="speech" title="Zhuangzi">'You were indeed stupid, my master, in the use
                    of what was large. There was a man of Song who was skilful at making a salve
                    which kept the hands from getting chapped; and (his family) for generations had
                    made the bleaching of cocoon-silk their business. A stranger heard of it, and
                    proposed to buy the art of the preparation for a hundred ounces of silver. The
                    kindred all came together, and considered the proposal. "We have," said they,
                    "been bleaching cocoon-silk for generations, and have only gained a little
                    money. Now in one morning we can sell to this man our art for a hundred ounces -
                    let him have it." The stranger accordingly got it and went away with it to give
                    counsel to the king of Wu, who was then engaged in hostilities with Yue. The
                    king gave him the command of his fleet, and in the winter he had an engagement
                    with that of Yue, on which he inflicted a great defeat, and was invested with a
                    portion of territory taken from Yue. The keeping the hands from getting chapped
                    was the same in both cases; but in the one case it led to the investiture (of
                    the possessor of the salve), and in the other it had only enabled its owners to
                    continue their bleaching. The difference of result was owing to the different
                    use made of the art. Now you, Sir, had calabashes large enough to hold five
                    piculs; why did you not think of making large bottle-gourds of them, by means of
                    which you could have floated over rivers and lakes, instead of giving yourself
                    the sorrow of finding that they were useless for holding anything. Your mind, my
                    master, would seem to have been closed against all intelligence!'</span></p>



            <p>Huizi said to Zhuangzi, <span class="speech" title="Huizi">'I have a large tree,
                    which men call the Ailantus. Its trunk swells out to a large size, but is not
                    fit for a carpenter to apply his line to it; its smaller branches are knotted
                    and crooked, so that the disk and square cannot be used on them. Though planted
                    on the wayside, a builder would not turn his head to look at it. Now your words,
                    Sir, are great, but of no use - all unite in putting them away from
                    them.'</span> Zhuangzi replied, <span class="speech" title="Zhuangzi">'Have you
                    never seen a wildcat or a weasel? There it lies, crouching and low, till the
                    wanderer approaches; east and west it leaps about, avoiding neither what is high
                    nor what is low, till it is caught in a trap, or dies in a net. Again there is
                    the Yak, <span class="figurative" style="simile">so large that it is like a
                        cloud hanging in the sky</span>. It is large indeed, but it cannot catch
                    mice. You, Sir, have a large tree and are troubled because it is of no use - why
                    do you not plant it in a tract where there is nothing else, or in a wide and
                    barren wild? There you might saunter idly by its side, or in the enjoyment of
                    untroubled ease sleep beneath it. Neither bill nor axe would shorten its
                    existence; there would be nothing to injure it. <span class="rhetorical">What is
                        there in its uselessness to cause you distress?</span></span>'</p>

        </section>
        <h1><a class="title" href="#contents" id="chapter2">Chapter 2:The Adjustment of
                Controversies</a></h1>
        <section>


            <p>Nan-Guo Zi-Qi was seated, leaning forward on his stool. He was looking up to heaven
                and breathed gently, seeming to be in a trance, and to have lost all consciousness
                of any companion. (His disciple), Yan Cheng Zi-You, who was in attendance and
                standing before him, said, <span class="speech" title="Yan Cheng Zi-You">'What is
                    this? <span class="rhetorical">Can the body be made to become thus like a
                        withered tree, and the mind to become like slaked lime?</span>His appearance
                    as he leans forward on the stool to-day is such as I never saw him have before
                    in the same position.'</span> Zi-Qi said, <span class="speech"
                    title="Nan-Guo Zi-Qi">'Yan, you do well to ask such a question, I had just now
                    lost myself; but how should you understand it?<span class="comparison">You may
                        have heard the notes of Man, but have not heard those of Earth; you may have
                        heard the notes of Earth, but have not heard those of
                Heaven.'</span></span></p>

            <p>Zi-You said, <span class="speech" title="Yan Cheng Zi-You">'I venture to ask from you
                    a description of all these.'</span> The reply was, <span class="speech"
                    title="Nan-Guo Zi-Qi">'When the breath of the Great Mass (of nature) comes
                    strongly, it is called Wind. <span class="rhetorical">Sometimes it does not come
                        so; but when it does, then from a myriad apertures there issues its excited
                        noise; have you not heard it in a prolonged gale? Take the projecting bluff
                        of a mountain forest - in the great trees, a hundred spans
                        round,</span><span class="figurative" style="metaphor">the apertures and
                        cavities are like the nostrils, or the mouth, or the ears; now square, now
                        round like a cup or a mortar; here like a wet footprint, and there like a
                        large puddle. (The sounds issuing from them are like) those of fretted
                        water, of the arrowy whizz,of the stern command, of the inhaling of the
                        breath, of the shout, of the gruff note, of the deep wail, of the sad and
                        piping note.</span> The first notes are slight, and those that follow
                    deeper, but in harmony with them. <span class="comparison">Gentle winds produce
                        a small response; violent winds a great one. When the fierce gusts have
                        passed away, all the apertures are empty (and still)</span> have you not
                    seen this in the bending and quivering of the branches and leaves?'</span></p>

            <p>Zi-You said, <span class="speech" title="Yan Cheng Zi-You">'<span class="comparison"
                        >The notes of Earth then are simply those which come from its myriad
                        apertures; and the notes of Man may just be compared to those which (are
                        brought from the tubes of) bamboo- allow me to ask about the notes of
                        Heaven.'</span></span> Zi-Qi replied, <span class="speech"
                    title="Nan-Guo Zi-Qi"><span class="rhetorical">'Blowing the myriad differences,
                        making them stop [proceed] of themselves, sealing their self-selecting - who
                        is it that stirs it all up?'</span></span></p>



            <p><span class="comparison">Great knowledge is wide and comprehensive; small knowledge
                    is partial and restricted. Great speech is exact and complete; small speech is
                    (merely) so much talk.</span><span class="comparison">When we sleep, the soul
                    communicates with (what is external to us); when we awake, the body is set free.
                </span> Our intercourse with others then leads to various activity, and daily there
                is the striving of mind with mind.<span class="negative">There are hesitancies; deep
                    difficulties; reservations; small apprehensions causing restless distress, and
                    great apprehensions producing endless fears.</span><span class="figurative"
                    style="metaphor">Where their utterances are like arrows from a bow, we have
                    those who feel it their charge to pronounce what is right and what is wrong;
                    where they are given out like the conditions of a covenant, we have those who
                    maintain their views, determined to overcome.</span>
                <span class="figurative" style="metaphor">(The weakness of their sections), like the
                    decay (of things) in autumn and winter, shows the failing (of the minds of some)
                    from day to day;or it is like their water which, once voided, cannot be gathered
                    up again.</span>
                <span class="comparison">Then their ideas seem as if fast bound with cords, showing
                    that the mind is become like an old and dry moat, and that it is nigh to death,
                    and cannot be restored to vigour and brightness. ThenJoy and anger, sadness and
                    pleasure, anticipation and regret, fickleness and fixedness, vehemence and
                    indolence, eagerness and tardiness;</span>-- <span class="figurative"
                    style="metaphor">(all these moods), like music from an empty tube, or mushrooms
                    from the warm moisture,day and night succeed to one another and come before us,
                    and we do not know whence they sprout.</span> Let us stop! Let us stop! <span
                    class="rhetorical">Can we expect to find out suddenly how they are
                    produced?</span></p>



            <p><span class="paradox">If there were not (the views of) another, I should not have
                    mine; if there were not I (with my views), his would be uncalled for:-- this is
                    nearly a true statement of the case, but we do not know what it is that makes it
                    be so.</span><span class="figurative" style="metaphor">It might seem as if there
                    would be a true Governor concerned in it, but we do not find any trace (of his
                    presence and acting). That such an One could act so I believe; but we do not see
                    His form. He has affections, but He has no form.<span class="rhetorical"><span
                            class="figurative" style="metaphor">Given the body, with its hundred
                            parts, its nine openings, and its six viscera, all complete in their
                            places, which do I love the most?</span> Do you love them all equally?
                        or do you love some more than others? Is it not the case that they all
                        perform the part of your servants and waiting women? All of them being such,
                        are they not incompetent to rule one another? or do they take it in turns to
                        be now ruler and now servants?</span></span>
                <span class="paradox">There must be a true Ruler (among them) whether by searching
                    you can find out His character or not, there is neither advantage nor hurt, so
                    far as the truth of His operation is concerned.</span></p>

            <p> When once we have received the bodily form complete, its parts do not fail to
                perform their functions till the end comes.<span class="rhetorical">In conflict with
                    things or in harmony with them, they pursue their course to the end, with the
                    speed of a galloping horse which cannot be stopped - is it not sad? To be
                    constantly toiling all one's lifetime, without seeing the fruit of one's labour,
                    and to be weary and worn out with his labour, without knowing where he is going
                    to - is it not a deplorable case? Men may say, 'But it is not death;' yet of
                    what advantage is this? When the body is decomposed, the mind will be the same
                    along with it - must not the case be pronounced very deplorable? Is the life of
                    man indeed enveloped in such darkness? Is it I alone to whom it appears so? And
                    does it not appear to be so to other men? </span></p>



            <p><span class="comparison"><span class="rhetorical">If we were to follow the judgments
                        of the predetermined mind, who would be left alone and without a
                        teacher?</span> Not only would it be so with those who know the sequences
                    (of knowledge and feeling) and make their own selection among them, but it would
                    be so as well with the stupid and unthinking. For one who has not this
                    determined mind, to have his affirmations and negations is like the case
                    described in the saying, 'He went to Yue to-day, and arrived at it
                    yesterday.'</span> It would be making what was not a fact to be a fact. But even
                    <em class="historical">the spirit-like Yu</em> could not have known how to do
                this, and how should one like me be able to do it? But speech is not like the
                blowing (of the wind); <span class="rhetorical">the speech has (a meaning in) his
                    words.If, however, what he says, be indeterminate (as from a mind not made up),
                    does he then really speak or not? He thinks that his words are different from
                    the chirpings of fledgelings; but is there any distinction between them or not?
                    But how can the Dao be so obscured, that there should be 'a True' and 'a False'
                    in it? How can speech be so obscured that there should be 'the Right' and 'the
                    Wrong' about them? Where shall the Dao go to that it will not be found? Where
                    shall speech be found that it will be inappropriate?</span> Dao becomes obscured
                through the small comprehension (of the mind), and speech comes to be obscure
                through the vain-gloriousness (of the speech). So it is that we have the contentions
                between the <em class="historical">Literati and the Mohists</em>, the one side
                affirming what the other denies, and vice versa. If we would decide on their several
                affirmations and denials, no plan is like bringing the (proper) light (of the mind)
                to bear on them.</p>



            <p><span class="paradox">There is no thing that is not "that", and there is no thing
                    that is not "this". If I look at something from "that", I do not see it; only if
                    I look at it from knowing do I know it.</span> Hence it is said, 'That view
                comes from this; and this view is a consequence of that:' - which is the theory that
                that view and this (the opposite views) produce each the other. <span
                    class="comparison">Although it be so, there is affirmed now life and now death;
                    now death and now life; now the admissibility of a thing and now its
                    inadmissibility; now its inadmissibility and now its admissibility.</span></p>

            <p><span class="comparison">(The disputants) now affirm and now deny; now deny and now
                    affirm. Therefore the sagely man does not pursue this method, but views things
                    in the light of (his) Heaven (-ly nature), and hence forms his judgment of what
                    is right. This view is the same as that, and that view is the same as this. But
                    that view involves both a right and a wrong; and this view involves also a right
                    and a wrong</span> - <span class="rhetorical">are there indeed the two views,
                    that and this? Or are there not the two views, that and this?</span> They have
                not found their point of correspondency which is called the pivot of the Dao. As
                soon as one finds this pivot, he stands in the centre of the ring (of thought),
                where he can respond without end to the changing views; without end to those
                affirming, and without end to those denying. Therefore I said, 'There is nothing
                like the proper light (of the mind).'</p>



            <p><span class="figurative" style="symbolism">By means of a finger (of my own) to
                    illustrate that the finger (of another) is not a finger is not so good a plan as
                    to illustrate that it is not so by means of what is (acknowledged to be) not a
                    finger; <em class="historical">and by means of (what I call) a horse to
                        illustrate that (what another calls) a horse is not so, is not so good a
                        plan as to illustrate that it is not a horse, by means of what is
                        (acknowledged to be) not a horse.</em> (All things in) heaven and earth may
                    be (dealt with as) a finger; (each of) their myriads may be (dealt with as) a
                    horse.</span> Does a thing seem so to me? (I say that) it is so. Does it seem
                not so to me? (I say that) it is not so. A path is formed by (constant) treading on
                the ground. A thing is called by its speaker through the (constant) application of
                the speaker to it. <span class="paradox">How is it so? It is so because it is so.
                    How is it not so? It is not so, because it is not so.</span></p>

            <p> Everything has its inherent character and its proper capability. There is nothing
                which has not these. <span class="comparison">Therefore, this being so,if we take a
                    stalk of grain and a (large) pillar, a loathsome (leper) and <em
                        class="historical">(a beauty like) Xi Shi</em>, things large and things
                    insecure, things crafty and things strange;</span> they may in the light of the
                Dao all be reduced to the same category (of opinion about them). <span
                    class="paradox">It was separation that led to completion; from completion ensued
                    dissolution. But all things, without regard to their completion and dissolution,
                    may again be comprehended in their unity</span> - it is only the far reaching in
                thought who know how to comprehend them in this unity. This being so, let us give up
                our devotion to our own views, and occupy ourselves with the ordinary views. These
                ordinary views are grounded on the use of things. (The study of that) use leads to
                the comprehensive judgment, and that judgment secures the success (of the inquiry).
                That success gained, we are near (to the object of our search), and there we stop.
                When we stop, and yet we do not know how it is so, we have what is called the
                Dao.</p>

            <p> When we toil our spirits and intelligence, obstinately determined (to establish our
                own view), and do not know the agreement (which underlies it and the views of
                others), we have what is called 'In the morning three.' What is meant by that 'In
                the morning three?' <em class="indirect-quote">A keeper of monkeys, in giving them
                    out their acorns, (once) said, 'In the morning I will give you three (measures)
                    and in the evening four.' This made them all angry, and he said, 'Very well. In
                    the morning I will give you four and in the evening three.' The monkeys were all
                    pleased. His two proposals were substantially the same, but the result of the
                    one was to make the creatures angry, and of the other to make them pleased</em>
                - an illustration of the point I am insisting on. Therefore the sagely man brings
                together a dispute in its affirmations and denials, and rests in the equal
                fashioning of Heaven. Both sides of the question are admissible.</p>



            <p>Among the men of old their knowledge reached the extreme point.<span
                    class="rhetorical">What was that extreme point? Some held that at first there
                    was not anything.</span>
                <span class="comparison">This is the extreme point, the utmost point to which
                    nothing can be added. A second class held that there was something, but without
                    any responsive recognition of it (on the part of men). A third class held that
                    there was such recognition, but there had not begun to be any expression of
                    different opinions about it.</span> It was through the definite expression of
                different opinions about it that there ensued injury to (the doctrine of) the Dao.
                It was this injury to the (doctrine of the) Dao which led to the formation of
                (partial) preferences.<span class="figurative" style="metaphor">Was it indeed after
                    such preferences were formed that the injury came? or did the injury precede the
                    rise of such preferences?If the injury arose after their formation, Zhao's
                    method of playing on the lute was natural. If the injury arose before their
                    formation, there would have been no such playing on the lute as Zhao's.</span>
                <em class="historical">Zhao Wen's playing on the lute</em>, <em class="historical"
                    >Shi Kuang's indicating time with his staff</em>, and <em class="historical"
                    >Huizi's (giving his views)</em>,</p>

            <p>while leaning against a dryandra tree (were all extraordinary). <span
                    class="positive">The knowledge of the three men (in their several arts) was
                    nearly perfect, and therefore they practised them to the end of their
                    lives.</span> They loved them because they were different from those of
                others.They loved them and wished to make them known to others. But as they could
                not be made clear, though they tried to make them so, they ended with the obscure
                (discussions) about <em class="historical">'the hard' and 'the white.'</em>
                <span class="negative">And their sons, moreover, with all the threads of their
                    fathers' compositions, yet to the end of their lives accomplished
                    nothing.</span>
                <span class="comparison">If they, proceeding in this way, could be said to have
                    succeeded, then am I also successful; if they cannot be pronounced successful,
                    neither I nor any other can succeed.</span><span class="figurative"
                    style="metaphor">Therefore the scintillations of light from the midst of
                    confusion and perplexity are indeed valued by the sagely man; but not to use
                    one's own views and to take his position on the ordinary views is what is called
                    using the (proper) light.</span></p>



            <p>But here now are some other sayings -I do not know whether they are of the same
                character as those which I have already given, or of a different character. Whether
                they be of the same character or not when looked at along with them, they have a
                character of their own, which cannot be distinguished from the others. But though
                this be the case, let me try to explain myself. <span class="paradox">There was a
                    beginning. There was a beginning before that beginning. There was a beginning
                    previous to that beginning before there was the beginning. There was existence;
                    there had been no existence. There was no existence before the beginning of that
                    no existence. There was no existence previous to the no existence before there
                    was the beginning of the no existence. If suddenly there was nonexistence, we do
                    not know whether it was really anything existing, or really not existing.</span>
                Now I have said what I have said, but I do not know whether what I have said be
                really anything to the point or not.</p>



            <p><span class="comparison">under heaven there is nothing greater than the tip of an
                    autumn down, and the <em class="geographic">Tai mountain</em> is
                    small.</span><span class="comparison">There is no one more long-lived than a
                    child which dies prematurely, and <em class="geographic">Peng Zu</em> did not
                    live out his time.</span><span class="rhetorical">Heaven, Earth, and I were
                    produced together, and all things and I are one. Since they are one, can there
                    be speech about them? But since they are spoken of as one, must there not be
                    room for speech? <span class="figurative" style="symbolism">One and Speech are
                        two; two and one are three.</span> Going on from this (in our enumeration),
                    the most skilful reckoner cannot reach (the end of the necessary numbers), and
                    how much less can ordinary people do so! Therefore from non-existence we proceed
                    to existence till we arrive at three; proceeding from existence to existence, to
                    how many should we reach? Let us abjure such procedure, and simply rest
                    here.</span></p>



            <p>The Dao at first met with no responsive recognition. Speech at first had no constant
                forms of expression. Because of this there came the demarcations (of different
                    views).<span class="comparison">Let me describe those demarcations: they are the
                    Left and the Right; the Relations and their Obligations; Classifications and
                    their Distinctions; Emulations and Contentions. These are what are called 'the
                    Eight Qualities.'</span> Outside the limits of the world of men, the sage
                occupies his thoughts, but does not discuss about anything; inside those limits he
                occupies his thoughts, but does not pass any judgments. In the <em
                    class="historical">Chun Qiu</em>, which embraces the history of the former
                kings, the sage indicates his judgments, but does not argue (in vindication of
                them). Thus it is that he separates his characters from one another without
                appearing to do so, and argues without the form of section. How does he do so? The
                sage cherishes his views in his own breast, while men generally state theirs
                sectionatively, to show them to others. Hence we have the saying, 'Disputation is a
                proof of not seeing clearly.<span class="comparison">'The Great Dao does not admit
                    of being praised. The Great section does not require words. Great Benevolence is
                    not (officiously) benevolent. Great Disinterestedness does not vaunt its
                    humility. Great Courage is not seen in stubborn bravery. The Dao that is
                    displayed is not the Dao. Words that are sectionative do not reach the point.
                    Benevolence that is constantly exercised does not accomplish its object.
                    Disinterestedness that vaunts its purity is not genuine. Courage that is most
                    stubborn is ineffectual. These five seem to be round (and complete), but they
                    tend to become square (and immovable).</span></p>

            <p><span class="rhetorical">Therefore the knowledge that stops at what it does not know
                    is the greatest.</span> Who knows the section that needs no words, and the Way
                that is not to be trodden? He who is able to know this has what is called 'The
                Heavenly Treasure-house.' He may pour into it without its being filled; he may pour
                from it without its being exhausted; and all the while he does not know whence (the
                supply) comes. This is what is called 'The Store of Light.'Therefore of <em
                    class="historical">old Yao</em> asked <em class="historical">Shun</em>, saying,
                'I wish to smite (the rulers of) <em class="historical">Zong</em>, <em
                    class="historical">Kuai</em>, and <em class="historical">Xu-Ao</em>. Even when
                standing in my court, I cannot get them out of my mind. How is it so?' Shun replied,
                'Those three rulers live (in their little states) as if they were among the mugwort
                and other brushwood - how is it that you cannot get them out of your mind? Formerly,
                ten suns came out together, and all things were illuminated by them; how much should
                (your) virtue exceed (all) suns!'</p>



            <p>Nie Que asked Wang Ni, saying, <span class="speech" title="Nie Que">'Do you know,
                    Sir, what all creatures agree in approving and affirming?'</span>
                <span class="speech" title="Wang Ni">'How should I know it?'</span> was the reply.
                    <span class="speech" title="Nie Que">'Do you know what it is that you do not
                    know?'</span> asked the other again, and <span class="speech" title="Wang Ni">he
                    got the same reply.</span> He asked a third time, <span class="speech"
                    title="Nie Que">'Then are all creatures thus without knowledge?'</span> and
                    <span class="speech" title="Wang Ni">Wang Ni answered as before</span>, (adding
                however), <span class="speech" title="Wang Ni">'<span class="paradox"
                        >Notwithstanding, I will try and explain my meaning. How do you know that
                        when I say "I know it," I really (am showing that) I do not know it, and
                        that when I say "I do not know it," I really am showing that I do know
                        it.'</span> And let me ask you some questions: '<span class="comparison">If
                        a man sleep in a damp place, he will have a pain in his loins, and half his
                        body will be as if it were dead; but will it be so with an eel? If he be
                        living in a tree, he will be frightened and all in a tremble; but will it be
                        so with a monkey? And does any one of the three know his right place
                        ?</span>
                    <span class="comparison">Men eat animals that have been fed on grain and grass;
                        deer feed on the thick-set grass; centipedes enjoy small snakes; owls and
                        crows delight in mice; but does any one of the four know the right
                        taste?</span>
                    <span class="comparison">The dog-headed monkey finds its mate in the female
                        gibbon; the elk and the axis deer cohabit; and the eel enjoys itself with
                        other fishes.</span>
                    <span class="comparison"><em class="historical">Mao Qiang</em> and <em
                            class="historical">Li Ji</em> were accounted by men to be most
                        beautiful, but when fishes saw them, they dived deep in the water from them;
                        when birds, they flew from them aloft; and when deer saw them, they
                        separated and fled away.But did any of these four know which in the world is
                        the right female attraction?</span> As I look at the matter, the first
                    principles of benevolence and righteousness and the paths of approval and
                    disapproval are inextricably mixed and confused together - how is it possible
                    that I should know how to discriminate among them?'</span></p>

            <p>Nie Que said (further),<span class="speech" title="Nie Que"> 'Since you, Sir, do not
                    know what is advantageous and what is hurtful, is the Perfect man also in the
                    same way without the knowledge of them?'</span> Wang Ni replied, <span
                    class="speech" title="Wang Ni">'<span class="figurative" style="hyperbole">The
                        Perfect man is spirit-like. Great lakes might be boiling about him, and he
                        would not feel their heat; <em class="geographic">the He</em> and <em
                            class="geographic">the Han</em> might be frozen up, and he would not
                        feel the cold; the hurrying thunderbolts might split the mountains, and the
                        wind shake the ocean, without being able to make him afraid. Being such, he
                        mounts on the clouds of the air, rides on the sun and moon, and rambles at
                        ease beyond the four seas. Neither death nor life makes any change in him,
                        and how much less should the considerations of advantage and injury do
                        so!'</span></span></p>



            <p>Qu Quezi asked Chang Wuzi, saying, <span class="speech" title="Qu Quezi">'I heard the
                    Master (speaking of such language as the following): "The sagely man does not
                    occupy himself with worldly affairs. He does not put himself in the way of what
                    is profitable, nor try to avoid what is hurtful; he has no pleasure in seeking
                    (for anything from any one); <span class="paradox">he does not care to be found
                        in (any established) Way; he speaks without speaking; he does not speak when
                        he speaks;</span> thus finding his enjoyment outside the dust and dirt (of
                    the world)." The Master considered all this to be a shoreless flow of mere
                    words, and I consider it to describe the course of the Mysterious Way - What do
                    you, Sir, think of it?'</span></p>

            <p>Chang Wuzi replied, <span class="speech" title="Chang Wuzi">'The hearing of such
                    words would have perplexed even <em class="historical">Huang Di</em>, and how
                    should <em class="historical">Qiu</em> be competent to understand them? And you,
                    moreover, are too hasty in forming your estimate (of their meaning). You see the
                    egg, and (immediately) look out for the cock (that is to be hatched from it);
                    you see the bow, and (immediately) look out for the dove (that is to be brought
                    down by it) being roasted. I will try to explain the thing to you in a rough
                    way; do you in the same way listen to me. <span class="rhetorical">How could any
                        one stand by the side of the sun and moon, and hold under his arm all space
                        and all time?</span>
                    <span class="positive">(Such language only means that the sagely man) keeps his
                        mouth shut, and puts aside questions that are uncertain and dark; making his
                        inferior capacities unite with him in honouring (the One Lord).</span>Men in
                    general bustle about and toil; <span class="negative">the sagely man seems
                        stupid and to know nothing.</span> He blends ten thousand years together in
                    the one (conception of time); the myriad things all pursue their spontaneous
                    course, and they are all before him as doing so. <span class="rhetorical">How do
                        I know that the love of life is not a delusion? and that the dislike of
                        death is not like a young person's losing his way, and not knowing that he
                        is (really) going home? </span><em class="historical">Li Ji</em> was a
                    daughter of the border Warden of <em class="geographic">Ai</em>. When (the ruler
                    of) <em class="historical">the state of Jin</em> first got possession of her,
                    she wept till the tears wetted all the front of her dress. But when she came to
                    the place of the king, shared with him his luxurious couch, and ate his
                    grain-and-grass-fed meat, then she regretted that she had wept. How do I know
                    that the dead do not repent of their former craving for life? <span
                        class="comparison">Those who dream of (the pleasures of) drinking may in the
                        morning wail and weep; those who dream of wailing and weeping may in the
                        morning be going out to hunt.</span><span class="comparison">When they were
                        dreaming they did not know it was a dream; in their dream they may even have
                        tried to interpret it; but when they awoke they knew that it was a dream.
                        And there is the great awaking, after which we shall know that this life was
                        a great dream. All the while, the stupid think they are awake, and with nice
                        discrimination insist on their knowledge</span>; now playing the part of
                    rulers, and now of grooms. Bigoted was that Qiu! He and you are both dreaming. I
                    who say that you are dreaming am dreaming myself. These words seem very strange;
                    but if after ten thousand ages we once meet with a great sage who knows how to
                    explain them, it will be as if we met him (unexpectedly) some morning or
                    evening. <span class="rhetorical">Since you made me enter into this discussion
                        with you, if you have got the better of me and not I of you, are you indeed
                        right, and I indeed wrong?If I have got the better of you and not you of me,
                        am I indeed right and you indeed wrong? Is the one of us right and the other
                        wrong? are we both right or both wrong? Since we cannot come to a mutual and
                        common understanding, men will certainly continue in darkness on the
                        subject. Whom shall I employ to adjudicate in the matter? If I employ one
                        who agrees with you, how can he, agreeing with you, do so correctly? If I
                        employ one who agrees with me, how can he, agreeing with me, do so
                        correctly? If I employ one who disagrees with you and I, how can he,
                        disagreeing with you and I, do so correctly? If I employ one who agrees with
                        you and I, how can he, agreeing with you and I, do so correctly? In this way
                        I and you and those others would all not be able to come to a mutual
                        understanding; and shall we then wait for that (great sage)? (We need not do
                        so.)</span> To wait on others to learn how conflicting opinions are changed
                    is simply like not so waiting at all. The harmonising of them is to be found in
                    the invisible operation of Heaven, and by following this on into the unlimited
                    past. It is by this method that we can complete our years (without our minds
                    being disturbed). What is meant by harmonising (conflicting opinions) in the
                    invisible operation of Heaven? <span class="comparison">There is the affirmation
                        and the denial of it; and there is the assertion of an opinion and the
                        rejection of it. If the affirmation be according to the reality of the fact,
                        it is certainly different from the denial of it - there can be no dispute
                        about that. If the assertion of an opinion be correct, it is certainly
                        different from its rejection - neither can there be any dispute about
                        that.</span> Let us forget the lapse of time; let us forget the conflict of
                    opinions. Let us make our appeal to the Infinite, and take up our position
                    there.'</span></p>



            <p>The Penumbra asked the Shadow, saying, <span class="speech" title="Penumbra"
                    >'Formerly you were walking on, and now you have stopped; formerly you were
                    sitting, and now you have risen up - how is it that you are so without
                    stability?'</span> The Shadow replied, <span class="speech" title="Shadow">'I
                    wait for the movements of something else to do what I do, and that something
                    else on which I wait waits further on another to do as it does. <span
                        class="figurative" style="symbolism">My waiting, is it for the scales of a
                        snake, or the wings of a cicada?</span> How should I know why I do one
                    thing, or do not do another?</span></p>



            <p>Formerly, I, <em class="historical">Zhuang Zhou</em>, dreamt that I was a butterfly,
                a butterfly flying about, feeling that it was enjoying itself. I did not know that
                it was Zhou. Suddenly I awoke, and was myself again, the veritable Zhou. I did not
                know whether it had formerly been Zhou dreaming that he was a butterfly, or it was
                now a butterfly dreaming that it was Zhou. But between Zhou and a butterfly there
                must be a difference. This is a case of what is called the Transformation of
                Things.'</p>

        </section>
        <h1><a class="title" href="#contents" id="chapter3">Chapter 3:Nourishing the Lord of
                Life</a></h1>
        <section>



            <p>There is a limit to our life, but to knowledge there is no limit. With what is
                limited to pursue after what is unlimited is a perilous thing; and when, knowing
                this, we still seek the increase of our knowledge, the peril cannot be averted.
                There should not be the practice of what is good with any thought of the fame (which
                it will bring), nor of what is evil with any approximation to the punishment (which
                it will incur): an accordance with the Central Element (of our nature) is the
                regular way to preserve the body, to maintain the life, to nourish our parents, and
                to complete our term of years. </p>




            <p>His cook was cutting up an ox for the ruler Wen Hui. Whenever he applied his hand,
                leaned forward with his shoulder, planted his foot, and employed the pressure of his
                knee, in the audible ripping off of the skin, and slicing operation of the knife,
                the sounds were all in regular cadence. <span class="figurative" style="simile"
                    >Movements and sounds proceeded as in the dance of 'the Mulberry Forest' and the
                    blended notes of the King Shou.'</span> The ruler said, <span class="speech"
                    title="King Shou">'Ah! Admirable! That your art should have become so
                    perfect!'</span> (Having finished his operation), the cook laid down his knife,
                and replied to the remark, <span class="speech" title="Cook">'What your servant
                    loves is the method of the Dao, something in advance of any art. When I first
                    began to cut up an ox, I saw nothing but the (entire) carcase. After three years
                    I ceased to see it as a whole. Now I deal with it in a spirit-like manner, and
                        <span class="figurative" style="metaphor">do not look at it with my
                        eyes.</span> The use of my senses is discarded, and my spirit acts as it
                    wills. Observing the natural lines, (my knife) <span class="figurative"
                        style="personification">slips through the great crevices and slides through
                        the great cavities, taking advantage of the facilities thus
                        presented.</span> My art avoids the membranous ligatures, and much more the
                    great bones. A good cook changes his knife every year; (it may have been
                    injured) in cutting - an ordinary cook changes his every month - (it may have
                    been) broken. Now my knife has been in use for nineteen years; it has cut up
                    several thousand oxen, and yet its edge is as sharp as if it had newly come from
                    the whetstone. There are the interstices of the joints, and the edge of the
                    knife has no (appreciable) thickness; when that which is so thin enters where
                    the interstice is, how easily it moves along! The blade has more than room
                    enough. Nevertheless, whenever I come to a complicated joint, and see that there
                    will be some difficulty, I proceed anxiously and with caution, not allowing my
                    eyes to wander from the place, and moving my hand slowly. Then by a very slight
                    movement of the knife, the part is quickly separated, and <span
                        class="figurative" style="simile">drops like (a clod of) earth to the
                        ground</span>. Then standing up with the knife in my hand, I look all round,
                    and in a leisurely manner, with an air of satisfaction, wipe it clean, and put
                    it in its sheath.'</span> The ruler Wen Hui said, <span class="speech"
                    title="Wen Hui">'Excellent! I have heard the words of my cook, and learned from
                    them the nourishment of (our) life.'</span></p>




            <p>When Gong-wen Xian saw the Master of the Left, he was startled, and said, <span
                    class="speech" title="Gong-Wen Xian">'What sort of man is this? How is it he has
                    but one foot? Is it from Heaven? or from Man?'</span> Then he added, <span
                    class="speech" title="Gong-Wen Xian">'It must be from Heaven, and not from Man.
                    Heaven's making of this man caused him to have but one foot. In the person of
                    man, each foot has its marrow. By this I know that his peculiarity is from
                    Heaven, and not from Man.</span></p>



            <p>A pheasant of the marshes has to take ten steps to pick up a mouthful of food, and
                thirty steps to get a drink, but it does not seek to be nourished in a coop. Though
                its spirit would (there) enjoy a royal abundance, it does not think (such
                confinement) good.' </p>




            <p>When Lao Dan died, Qin Shi went to console (with his son), but after crying out three
                times, he came out. The disciples said to him, <span class="speech"
                    title="Disciples">'Were you not a friend of the Master?'</span>
                <span class="speech" title="Qin Shi">'I was,'</span> he replied, and they said,
                    <span class="speech" title="Disciples">'Is it proper then to offer your
                    condolences merely as you have done?'</span> He said,<span class="speech"
                    title="Qin Shi"> 'It is. At first I thought he was the man of men, and now I do
                    not think so. When I entered a little ago and expressed my condolences, there
                    were the <span class="comparison">old men wailing as if they had lost a
                        son</span>, and the <span class="comparison">young men wailing as if they
                        had lost their mother</span>. In his attracting and uniting them to himself
                    in such a way there must have been that which made them involuntarily express
                    their words (of condolence), and involuntarily wail, as they were doing. And
                    this was a hiding from himself of his Heaven (-nature), and an excessive
                    indulgence of his (human) feelings; a forgetting of what he had received (in
                    being born); what the ancients called the punishment due to neglecting the
                    Heaven (-nature). When the Master came, it was at the proper time; when he went
                    away, it was the simple sequence (of his coming). Quiet acquiescence in what
                    happens at its proper time, and quietly submitting (to its ceasing) afford no
                    occasion for grief or for joy. <em class="indirect-quote">The ancients described
                        (death) as the loosening of the cord on which God suspended (the
                    life).</em></span>
            </p>




            <p>What we can point to are the faggots that have been consumed; but the fire is
                transmitted (elsewhere), and we know not that it is over and ended.</p>

        </section>
        <h1><a class="title" href="#contents" id="chapter4">Chapter 4:Man in the World, Associated
                with other Men</a></h1>
        <section>


            <p>Yan Hui went to see Zhongni, and asked leave to take his departure.<span
                    class="speech" title="Zhongni">'Where are you going to?'</span> asked the
                Master. <span class="speech" title="Yanhui">'I will go to <em class="historical"
                        >Wei</em>'</span> was the reply. <span class="speech" title="Zhongni">'And
                    with what object?'</span>
                <span class="speech" title="Yanhui">'I have heard that <em class="geographic">the
                        ruler of Wei</em> is in the vigour of his years, and consults none but
                    himself as to his course. <span class="figurative" style="hyperbole"><span
                            class="negative">He deals with his state as if it were a light matter,
                            and has no perception of his errors. He thinks lightly of his people's
                            dying; the dead are lying all over the country as if no smaller space
                            could contain them; on the plains and about the marshes, they are as
                            thick as heaps of fuel.</span></span> The people know not where to turn
                    to. I have heard you, Master, say, <em class="direct-quote">"Leave the state
                        that is well governed; go to the state where disorder prevails."</em> At the
                    door of a physician there are many who are ill. I wish through what I have heard
                    (from you) to think out some methods (of dealing with <em class="geographic"
                        >Wei</em>), if peradventure the evils of the state may be cured.'</span></p>

            <p>Zhongni said, <span class="speech" title="Zhongni">'Alas! The risk is that you will
                    go only to suffer in the punishment (of yourself)! The right method (in such a
                    case) will not admit of any admixture. With such admixture, the one method will
                    become many methods. Their multiplication will embarrass you. That embarrassment
                    will make you anxious. However anxious you may be, you will not save (yourself).
                    The perfect men of old first had (what they wanted to do) in themselves, and
                    afterwards they found (the response to it) in others. <span class="rhetorical"
                        >If what they wanted in themselves was not fixed, what leisure had they to
                        go and interfere with the proceedings of any tyrannous man? Moreover, do you
                        know how virtue is liable to be dissipated, and how wisdom proceeds to
                        display itself?</span><span class="positive">Virtue is dissipated in (the
                        pursuit of) the name for it, and wisdom seeks to display itself in the
                        striving with others.</span><span class="negative">In the pursuit of the
                        name men overthrow one another; wisdom becomes a weapon of contention. Both
                        these things are instruments of evil, and should not be allowed to have free
                        course in one's conduct.</span> Supposing one's virtue to be great and his
                    sincerity firm, if he do not comprehend the spirit of those (whom he wishes to
                    influence); and <span class="negative">supposing he is free from the disposition
                        to strive for reputation, if he do not comprehend their minds;-- when in
                        such a case he forcibly insists on benevolence and righteousness, setting
                        them forth in the strongest and most direct language, before the tyrant,
                        then he, hating (his reprover's) possession of those excellences, will put
                        him down as doing him injury.</span>
                    <span class="paradox">He who injures others is sure to be injured by them in
                        return. You indeed will hardly escape being injured by the man (to whom you
                        go)!</span>
                    <span class="rhetorical">Further, if perchance he takes pleasure in men of worth
                        and hates those of an opposite character, what is the use of your seeking to
                        make yourself out to be different (from such men about him)?</span> Before
                    you have begun to announce (your views), he, as king and ruler, will take
                    advantage of you, and immediately contend with you for victory. Your eyes will
                    be dazed and full of perplexity; you will try to look pleased with him; you will
                    frame your words with care; your demeanour will be conformed to his; you will
                    confirm him in his views.<span class="figurative" style="simile">In this way you
                        will be adding fire to fire, and water to water, increasing, as we may
                        express it, the evils (which you deplore).</span> To these signs of
                    deferring to him at the first there will be no end. You will be in danger,
                    seeing he does not believe you, of making your words more strong, and you are
                    sure to die at the hands of such a tyrant. And formerly <em class="historical"
                        >Jie killed Guan Long-feng</em>, and <em class="historical">Zhou killed the
                        prince Bi-gan.</em>
                    <span class="negative">Both of these cultivated their persons, bending down in
                        sympathy with the lower people to comfort them suffering (as they did) from
                        their oppressors, and on their account opposing their superiors.</span> On
                    this account, because they so ordered their conduct, their rulers compassed
                    their destruction - such regard had they for their own fame. (Again),<em
                        class="historical">Yao anciently attacked (the states of) Cong-qi and
                        Xu-ao</em>, and <em class="historical">Yu attacked the ruler of Hu.</em>
                    <span class="negative">Those states were left empty, and with no one to continue
                        their population, the people being exterminated. They had engaged in war
                        without ceasing; their craving for whatever they could get was insatiable.
                        And this (ruler of Wei) is, like them, one who craves after fame and greater
                        substance - have you not heard it? Those sages were not able to overcome the
                        thirst for fame and substance - how much less will you be able to do
                        so!</span> Nevertheless you must have some ground (for the course which you
                    wish to take); pray try and tell it to me.'</span></p>

            <p>Yan Hui said, <span class="speech" title="Yanhui">'May I go, doing so in uprightness
                    and humility, using also every endeavour to be uniform (in my plans of
                    operation)?'</span>
                <span class="speech" title="Zhongni">'No, indeed!' was the reply. '<span
                        class="negative">How can you do so? This man makes a display of being filled
                        to overflowing (with virtue), and has great self-conceit. His feelings are
                        not to be determined from his countenance. Ordinary men do not (venture to)
                        oppose him, and he proceeds from the way in which he affects them to seek
                        still more the satisfaction of his own mind. He may be described as
                        unaffected by the (small lessons of) virtue brought to bear on him from day
                        to day; and how much less will he be so by your great lessons? He will be
                        obstinate, and refuse to be converted. He may outwardly agree with you, but
                        inwardly there will be no self-condemnation - how can you (go to him in this
                        way and be successful)?'</span></span> (Yan Hui) rejoined, <span
                    class="speech" title="Yanhui">'Well then; <span class="positive">while inwardly
                        maintaining my straightforward intention, I will outwardly seem to bend to
                        him. I will deliver (my lessons), and substantiate them by appealing to
                        antiquity. Inwardly maintaining my straightforward intention, I shall be a
                        co-worker with Heaven.</span>
                    <span class="comparison">When I thus speak of being a co-worker with Heaven, it
                        is because I know that (the sovereign, whom we style) the son of Heaven, and
                        myself, are equally regarded by Heaven as Its sons. And should I then, as if
                        my words were only my own, be seeking to find whether men approved of them,
                        or disapproved of them? In this way men will pronounce me a (sincere and
                        simple) boy. This is what is called being a co-worker with Heaven. Outwardly
                        bending (to the ruler), I shall be a co-worker with other men.</span> To
                    carry (the memorandum tablet to court), to kneel, and to bend the body
                    reverentially - these are the observances of ministers. They all employ them,
                    and should I presume not to do so? Doing what other men do, they would have no
                    occasion to blame me. This is what is called being a fellow-worker with other
                    men. Fully declaring my sentiments and substantiating them by appealing to
                    antiquity, I shall be a co-worker with the ancients. Although the words in which
                    I convey my lessons may really be condemnatory (of the ruler), they will be
                    those of antiquity, and not my own. In this way, though straightforward, I shall
                    be free from blame. This is what is called being a co-worker with antiquity. May
                    I go to <em class="geographic">Wei</em> in this way, and be successful?</span>'
                    <span class="speech" title="Zhongni">'No indeed!' said Zhongni. 'How can you do
                    so? You have too many plans of proceeding, and have not spied out (the ruler's
                    character). Though you firmly adhere to your plans, you may be held free from
                    transgression, but this will be all the result. How can you (in this way)
                    produce the transformation (which you desire)? All this only shows (in you) the
                    mind of a teacher!'</span></p>



            <p>Yan Hui said, <span class="speech" title="Yanhui">'I can go no farther; I venture to
                    ask the method from you.'</span> Zhongni replied, <span class="speech"
                    title="Zhongni">'It is fasting, (as) I will tell you. (But) when you have the
                    method, will you find it easy to practise it? He who thinks it easy will be
                    disapproved of by the bright Heaven.'</span> Hui said, <span class="speech"
                    title="Yanhui">'My family is poor. For months together we have no spirituous
                    drink, nor do we taste the proscribed food or any strong-smelling vegetables;--
                    can this be regarded as fasting?'</span> The reply was, <span class="speech"
                    title="Zhongni">'It is the fasting appropriate to sacrificing, but it is not the
                    fasting of the mind.'</span>
                <span class="speech" title="Yanhui">'I venture to ask what that fasting of the mind
                    is,'</span> said Hui, and Zhongni answered, <span class="speech" title="Zhongni"
                        >'<span class="paradox">Maintain a perfect unity in every movement of your
                        will, You will not wait for the hearing of your ears about it, but for the
                        hearing of your mind. You will not wait even for the hearing of your mind,
                        but for the hearing of the spirit. Let the hearing (of the ears) rest with
                        the ears. Let the mind rest in the verification (of the rightness of what is
                        in the will). But the spirit is free from all pre-occupation and so waits
                        for (the appearance of) things. Where the (proper) course is, there is
                        freedom from all pre-occupation; such freedom is the fasting of the
                        mind.'</span></span> Hui said, <span class="speech" title="Ynahui">'Before
                    it was possible for me to employ (this method), there I was, the Hui that I am;
                    now, that I can employ it, the Hui that I was has passed away. Can I be said to
                    have obtained this freedom from pre-occupation?'</span></p>

            <p>The Master replied, <span class="speech" title="Zhongni">'Entirely. I tell you that
                    you can enter and be at ease in the enclosure (where he is), and not come into
                    collision with the reputation (which belongs to him). If he listen to your
                    counsels, let him hear your notes; if he will not listen, be silent. <span
                        class="figurative" style="metaphor">Open no (other) door; employ no other
                        medicine; dwell with him (as with a friend) in the same apartment, and as if
                        you had no other option, and you will not be far from success in your
                        object.</span>
                    <span class="comparison">not to move a step is easy; to walk without treading on
                        the ground is difficult. In acting after the manner of men, it is easy to
                        fall into hypocrisy; in acting after the manner of Heaven, it is difficult
                        to play the hypocrite. I have heard of flying with wings; I have not heard
                        of flying without them. I have heard of the knowledge of the wise; I have
                        not heard of the knowledge of the unwise.</span> Look at that aperture (left
                    in the wall); the empty apartment is filled with light through it. Felicitous
                    influences rest (in the mind thus emblemed), as in their proper resting place.
                    Even when they do not so rest, we have what is called (the body) seated and (the
                    mind) galloping abroad. The information that comes through the ears and eyes is
                    comprehended internally, and the knowledge of the mind becomes something
                    external: (when this is the case), the spiritual intelligences will come, and
                    take up their dwelling with us, and how much more will other men do so! All
                    things thus undergo a transforming influence. This was the hinge on which Yu and
                    Shun moved; it was this which Fu-xi and Ji-qu practised all their lives: how
                    much more should other men follow the same rule!'</span></p>



            <p>Zi Gao, duke of <em class="historical">She</em>, being about to proceed on a mission
                to Qi, asked Zhongni, saying, <span class="speech" title="Zigao">'The king is
                    sending me, <em class="historical">Zhu Liang</em>, on a mission which is very
                    important. Qi will probably treat me as his commissioner with great respect, but
                    it will not be in a hurry (to attend to the business). Even an ordinary man
                    cannot be readily moved (to action), and how much less the prince of a state! I
                    am very full of apprehension. You, <span class="comparison">Sir, once said to me
                        that of all things, great or small, there were few which, if not conducted
                        in the proper way, could be brought to a happy conclusion; that, if the
                        thing were not successful, there was sure to be the evil of being dealt with
                        after the manner of men; that, if it were successful, there was sure to be
                        the evil of constant anxiety; and that, whether it succeeded or not, it was
                        only the virtuous man who could secure its not being followed by
                        evil.</span> In my diet I take what is coarse, and do not seek delicacies -
                    a man whose cookery does not require him to be using cooling drinks. This
                    morning I received my charge, and in the evening I am drinking iced water; am I
                    not feeling the internal heat (and discomfort)? Such is my state before I have
                    actually engaged in the affair; I am already suffering from conflicting
                    anxieties. And if the thing do not succeed, (the king) is sure to deal with me
                    after the manner of men. The evil is twofold; as a minister, I am not able to
                    bear the burden (of the mission). Can you, Sir, tell me something (to help me in
                    the case)?'</span></p>

            <p>Zhongni replied, <span class="speech" title="Zhongni">'In all things under heaven
                    there are two great cautionary considerations: the one is the requirement
                    implanted (in the nature); the other is the conviction of what is right. The
                    love of a son for his parents is the implanted requirement, and can never be
                    separated from his heart; the service of his ruler by a minister is what is
                    right, and from its obligation there is no escaping anywhere between heaven and
                    earth. These are what are called the great cautionary considerations. Therefore
                    a son finds his rest in serving his parents without reference to or choice of
                    place; and this is the height of filial duty. In the same way a subject finds
                    his rest in serving his ruler, without reference to or choice of the business;
                    and this is the fullest discharge of loyalty. When men are simply obeying (the
                    dictates of) their hearts, the considerations of grief and joy are not readily
                    set before them. They know that there is no alternative to their acting as they
                    do, and rest in it as what is appointed; and this is the highest achievement of
                    virtue. He who is in the position of a minister or of a son has indeed to do
                    what he cannot but do. Occupied with the details of the business (in hand), and
                    forgetful of his own person, what leisure has he to think of his pleasure in
                    living or his dislike of death? You, my master, may well proceed on your
                    mission. But let me repeat to you what I have heard: In all intercourse (between
                    states), if they are near to each other, there should be mutual friendliness,
                    verified by deeds; if they are far apart, there must be sincere adherence to
                    truth in their messages. Those messages will be transmitted by internuncios. But
                    to convey messages which express the complacence or the dissatisfaction of the
                    two parties is the most difficult thing in the world. If they be those of mutual
                    complacence, there is sure to be an overflow of expressions of satisfaction; if
                    of mutual dissatisfaction, an overflow of expressions of dislike. But all
                    extravagance leads to reckless language, and such language fails to command
                    belief. When this distrust arises, woe to the internuncio! Hence the Rules for
                    Speech say, <em class="direct-quote">"Transmit the message exactly as it stands;
                        do not transmit it with any overflow of language; so is (the internuncio)
                        likely to keep himself whole."</em>
                    <span class="comparison">Moreover, skilful wrestlers begin with open trials of
                        strength, but always end with masked attempts (to gain the victory);</span>
                    as their excitement grows excessive, they display much wonderful dexterity.
                    Parties drinking according to the rules at first observe good order, but always
                    end with disorder; as their excitement grows excessive, their fun becomes
                    uproarious. In all things it is so. People are at first sincere, but always end
                    with becoming rude; at the commencement things are treated as trivial, but as
                    the end draws near, they assume great proportions. Words are (like) the waves
                    acted on by the wind; <span class="figurative" style="simile">the real point of
                        the matters (discussed by them) is lost. The wind and waves are easily set
                        in motion; the success of the matter of which the real point is lost is
                        easily put in peril. Hence quarrels are occasioned by nothing so much as by
                        artful words and one-sided speeches.</span> The breath comes angrily, as
                    when a beast, driven to death, wildly bellows forth its rage. On this
                    animosities arise on both sides. Hasty examination (of the case) eagerly
                    proceeds, and revengeful thoughts arise in their minds; they do not know how.
                    Since they do not know how such thoughts arise, who knows how they will end?
                    Hence the Rules for Speech say, <em class="indirect-quote">"Let not an
                        internuncius depart from his instructions. Let him not urge on a settlement.
                        If he go beyond the regular rules, he will complicate matters. Departing
                        from his instructions and urging on a settlement imperils negotiations. A
                        good settlement is proved by its lasting long, and a bad settlement cannot
                        be altered - ought he not to be careful?"</em> Further still, let your mind
                    find its enjoyment in the circumstances of your position; nourish the central
                    course which you pursue, by a reference to your unavoidable obligations. This is
                    the highest object for you to pursue; what else can you do to fulfil the charge
                    (of your father and ruler). The best thing you can do is to be prepared to
                    sacrifice your life; and this is the most difficult thing to do.'</span></p>



            <p>Yan He, being about to undertake the office of Teacher of the eldest son of <em
                    class="historical">duke Ling of Wei</em>, consulted Qu Bo-yi. <span
                    class="speech" title="Yanhe">'Here,' said he, 'is this (young) man, whose
                    natural disposition is as bad as it could be. <span class="comparison">If I
                        allow him to proceed in a bad way, it will be at the peril of our state; if
                        I insist on his proceeding in a right way, it will be at the peril of my own
                        person.</span> His wisdom is just sufficient to know the errors of other
                    men, but he does not know how he errs himself. What am I to do in such a
                    case?'</span> Qu Bo-yi replied,<span class="speech" title="Quboyi">'Good indeed
                    is your question! Be on your guard; be careful; see that you keep yourself
                    correct! Your best plan will be, with your person to seek association with him,
                    and with your mind to try to be in harmony with him; and yet there are dangers
                    connected with both of these things. While seeking to keep near to him, do not
                    enter into his pursuits; while cultivating a harmony of mind with him, do not
                    show how superior you are to him. If in your personal association you enter into
                    his pursuits, you will fall with him and be ruined, you will tumble down with a
                    crash. If in maintaining a harmony with his mind, you show how different you are
                    from him, he will think you do so for the reputation and the name, and regard
                    you as a creature of evil omen. <span class="comparison">If you find him to be a
                        mere boy, be you with him as another boy; if you find him one of those who
                        will not have their ground marked out in the ordinary way, do you humour him
                        in this characteristic; if you find him to be free from lofty airs, show
                        yourself to be the same - (ever) leading him on so as to keep him free from
                        faults.</span> Do you not know (the fate of) the praying mantis? It angrily
                    stretches out its arms, to arrest the progress of the carriage, unconscious of
                    its inability for such a task, but showing how much it thinks of its own powers.
                    Be on your guard; be careful. If you cherish a boastful confidence in your own
                    excellence, and place yourself in collision with him, you are likely to incur
                    the fate (of the mantis). <span class="figurative" style="simile">Do you not
                        know how those who keep tigers proceed? They do not dare to supply them with
                        living creatures, because of the rage which their killing of them will
                        excite. They do not (even) dare to give them their food whole, because of
                        the rage which their rending of it will excite. They watch till their hunger
                        is appeased, (dealing with them) from their knowledge of their natural
                        ferocity.</span>Tigers are different from men, but they fawn on those who
                    feed them, and do so in accordance with their nature. <span class="figurative"
                        style="simile">When any of these are killed by them, it is because they have
                        gone against that nature. Those again who are fond of horses preserve their
                        dung in baskets, and their urine in jars. If musquitoes and gadflies light
                        on them, and the grooms brush them suddenly away, the horses break their
                        bits, injure (the ornaments on) their heads, and smash those on their
                        breasts. The more care that is taken of them, the more does their fondness
                        (for their attendants) disappear. Ought not caution to be exercised (in the
                        management of them)?'</span></span></p>



            <p>A (master) mechanic, called Shi, on his way to <em class="geographic">Qi</em>, came
                to <em class="geographic">Qu-yuan</em>, where he saw an oak-tree, which was used as
                the altar for the spirits of the land. It was so large that an ox standing behind it
                could not be seen. It measured a hundred spans round, and rose up eighty cubits on
                the hill before it threw out any branches, after which there were ten or so, from
                each of which a boat could be hollowed out. People came to see it in crowds as in a
                market place, but the mechanic did not look round at it, but held on his way without
                stopping. One of his workmen, however, looked long and admiringly at it, and then
                ran on to his master, and said to him, <span class="speech" title="workman">'Since I
                    followed you with my axe and bill, I have never seen such a beautiful mass of
                    timber as this. Why would you, Sir, not look round at it, but went on without
                    stopping?'</span>
                <span class="speech" title="Mr.shi">'Have done,' said Mr. Shi, 'and do not speak
                    about it. It is quite useless. <span class="negative">A boat made from its wood
                        would sink; a coffin or shell would quickly rot; an article of furniture
                        would soon go to pieces; a door would be covered with the exuding sap; a
                        pillar would be riddled by insects; the material of it is good for nothing,
                        and hence it is that it has attained to so great an age.'</span></span></p>

            <p>When Mr. Shi was returning, the altar-oak appeared to him in a dream, and said, <span
                    class="speech" title="altar-oak">'What other tree will you compare with me? Will
                    you compare me to one of your ornamental trees? <span class="negative">There are
                        hawthorns, pear-trees, orange-trees, pummelo-trees, gourds and other low
                        fruit-bearing plants. When their fruits are ripe, they are knocked down from
                        them, and thrown among the dirt. The large branches are broken, and the
                        smaller are torn away.</span>
                    <span class="comparison">So it is that their productive ability makes their
                        lives bitter to them; they do not complete their natural term of existence,
                        but come to a premature end in the middle of their time, bringing on
                        themselves the destructive treatment which they ordinarily receive. It is so
                        with all things. I have sought to discover how it was that I was so useless;
                        I had long done so, till (the effort) nearly caused my death; and now I have
                        learned it - it has been of the greatest use to me.</span><span
                        class="rhetorical">Suppose that I had possessed useful properties, should I
                        have become of the great size that I am? And moreover you and I are both
                        things - how should one thing thus pass its judgment on another? how is it
                        that you a useless man know all this about me a useless tree?'</span></span>
                When Mr. Shih awoke, he kept thinking about his dream, but the workman said, <span
                    class="speech" title="workman">'Being so taken with its uselessness, how is it
                    that it yet acts here as the altar for the spirits of the land?'</span><span
                    class="speech" title="Mr.shi"> 'Be still,' was the master's reply, 'and do not
                    say a word. It simply happened to grow here; and thus those who do not know it
                    do not speak ill of it as an evil thing. If it were not used as the altar, would
                    it be in danger of being cut down? Moreover, the reason of its being preserved
                    is different from that of the preservation of things generally; is not your
                    explaining it from the sentiment which you have expressed wide of the
                    mark?'</span></p>



            <p>Nan-bo Zi-Qi in rambling about <em class="geographic">the Heights of Shang</em>, saw
                a large and extraordinary tree. The teams of a thousand chariots might be sheltered
                under it, and its shade would cover them all! Zi-Qi said, <span class="speech"
                    title="Nanboziqi">'What a tree is this! It must contain an extraordinary amount
                    of timber!</span> When he looked up, <span class="negative">however, at its
                    smaller branches, they were so twisted and crooked that they could not be made
                    into rafters and beams; when he looked down to its root, its stem was divided
                    into so many rounded portions that neither coffin nor shell could be made from
                    them. He licked one of its leaves, and his mouth felt torn and wounded. The
                    smell of it would make a man frantic, as if intoxicated, for more than three
                    whole days together.</span>
                <span class="speech" title="Nanboziqi">'This, indeed,' said he, 'is a tree good for
                    nothing, and it is thus that it has attained to such a size. Ah! and spirit-like
                    men acknowledge this worthlessness (and its result).'</span> In <em
                    class="geographic">Song</em> there is <em class="geographic">the district of
                    Jing-shi</em>, in which catalpae, cypresses, and mulberry trees grow well. Those
                of them which are a span or two or rather more in circumference are cut down by
                persons who want to make posts to which to tie their monkeys; those which are three
                or four spans round are cut down by persons who want beams forr their lofty and
                famous houses; and those of seven or eight spans are cut down by noblemen and rich
                merchants who want single planks for the sides of their coffins. The trees in
                consequence do not complete their natural term of life, and come to a premature end
                in the middle of their growth under the axe and bill;-- this is the evil that
                befalls them from their supplying good timber. In the same way the Jie (book)
                specifies oxen that have white foreheads, pigs that have turned-up snouts, and men
                that are suffering from piles, and forbids their being sacrificed to <em
                    class="historical">the Ho</em>. <span class="comparison">The wizards know them
                    by these peculiarities and consider them to be inauspicious, but spirit-like men
                    consider them on this account to be very fortunate.</span></p>



            <p>There was <em class="historical">the deformed object Shu.</em> His chin seemed to
                hide his navel; his shoulders were higher than the crown of his head; the knot of
                his hair pointed to the sky; his five viscera were all compressed into the upper
                part of his body, and his two thigh bones were like ribs. By sharpening needles and
                washing clothes he was able to make a living. By sifting rice and cleaning it, he
                was able to support ten individuals. When the government was calling out soldiers,
                this poor Shu would bare his arms among the others; when it had any great service to
                be undertaken, because of his constant ailments, none of the work was assigned to
                him; when it was giving out grain to the sick, he received three kung, and ten
                bundles of firewood. <span class="comparison">If this poor man, so deformed in body,
                    was still able to support himself, and complete his term of life, how much more
                    may they do so, whose deformity is that of their faculties!</span></p>



            <p>When <em class="historical">Confucius</em> went to <em class="geographic">Chu</em>,
                    <em class="historical">Jie-yu</em>, the madman of Chu, as he was wandering
                about, passed by his door, and said, <span class="speech" title="Jieyu"><span
                        class="figurative" style="irony">0 Phoenix, 0 Phoenix, how is your virtue
                        degenerated! The future is not to be waited for; the past is not to be
                        sought again! When good order prevails in the world, the sage tries to
                        accomplish all his service; when disorder prevails, he may preserve his
                        life; at the present time, it is enough if he simply escape being punished.
                        Happiness is lighter than a feather, but no one knows how to support it;
                        calamity is heavier than the earth, and yet no one knows how to avoid it.
                        Give over! give over approaching men with the lessons of your virtue! You
                        are in peril! you are in peril, hurrying on where you have marked out the
                        ground against your advance! I avoid publicity, I avoid publicity, that my
                        path may not be injured. I pursue my course, now going backwards, now
                        crookedly, that my feet may not be hurt.'</span></span></p>



            <p>The mountain by its trees weakens itself. The grease which ministers to the fire
                fries itself. The cinnamon tree can be eaten, and therefore it is cut down. The
                varnish tree is useful, and therefore incisions are made in it. <span
                    class="paradox">All men know the advantage of being useful, but no one knows the
                    advantage of being useless.</span></p>

        </section>
        <h1><a class="title" href="#contents" id="chapter5">Chapter 5:The Seal of Virtue
                Complete</a></h1>
        <section>


            <p>In Lu there was a Wang Tai who had lost both his feet; while his disciples who
                followed and went about with him were as numerous as those of Zhongni. Chang Ji
                asked Zhongni about him, saying, <span class="speech" title="Chang Ji">'Though Wang
                    Tai is a cripple, the disciples who follow him about divide Lu equally with you,
                    Master. When he stands, he does not teach them; when he sits, he does not
                    discourse to them. But they go to him empty, and come back full. Is there indeed
                    such a thing as instruction without words? and while the body is imperfect, may
                    the mind be complete? What sort of man is he?'</span> Zhongni replied, <span
                    class="speech" title="Zhongni">'This master is a sage. I have only been too late
                    in going to him. I will make him my teacher; and how much more should those do
                    so who are not equal to me! Why should only the state of Lu follow him? I will
                    lead on all under heaven with me to do so.'</span></p>

            <p> Chang Ji rejoined, <span class="speech" title="Chang Ji">'He is a man who has lost
                    his feet, and yet he is known as the venerable Wang - he must be very different
                    from ordinary men. What is the peculiar way in which he employs his
                    mind?'</span> The reply was, <span class="speech" title="Zhongni">'Death and
                    life are great considerations, but they could work no change in him. Though
                    heaven and earth were to be overturned and fall, they would occasion him no
                    loss. His judgment is fixed regarding that in which there is no element of
                    falsehood; and, while other things change, he changes not. The transformations
                    of things are to him the developments prescribed for them, and he keeps fast
                    hold of the author of them.'</span></p>

            <p>Chang Ji said, <span class="speech" title="Chang Ji">'What do you mean?'</span>
                <span class="speech" title="Zhongni">'When we look at things,'</span> said Zhongni,
                    <span class="speech" title="Zhongni">'as they differ, we see them to be
                    different, (as for instance) the liver and the gall, or Chu and Yue; when we
                    look at them, as they agree, we see them all to be a unity. So it is with this
                    (Wang Tai). He takes no knowledge of the things for which his ears and eyes are
                    the appropriate organs, but his mind delights itself in the harmony of (all
                    excellent) qualities. He looks at the unity which belongs to things, and does
                    not perceive where they have suffered loss. He looks on the loss of his feet as
                    only the loss of so much earth.'</span></p>

            <p>Chang Ji said, <span class="speech" title="Chang Ji">'He is entirely occupied with
                    his (proper) self. By his knowledge he has discovered (the nature of) his mind,
                    and to that he holds as what is unchangeable; but how is it that men make so
                    much of him?'</span> The reply was, <span class="speech" title="Zhongni">'Men do
                    not look into running water as a mirror, but into still water - it is only the
                    still water that can arrest them all, and keep them (in the contemplation of
                    their real selves). Of things which are what they are by the influence of the
                    earth, it is only the pine and cypress which are the best instances - in winter
                    as in summer brightly green. Of those which were what they were by the influence
                    of Heaven, the most correct examples were Yao and Shun; fortunate in (thus)
                    maintaining their own life correct, and so as to correct the lives of others. As
                    a verification of the (power of) the original endowment, when it has been
                    preserved, take the result of fearlessness - how the heroic spirit of a single
                    brave soldier has been thrown into an army of nine hosts. If a man only seeking
                    for fame and able in this way to secure it can produce such an effect, how much
                    more (may we look for a greater result) from one whose rule is over heaven and
                    earth, and holds all things in his treasury, who simply has his lodging in the
                    six members of his body, whom his ears and eyes serve but as conveying
                    emblematic images of things, who comprehends all his knowledge in a unity, and
                    whose mind never dies! If such a man were to choose a day on which he would
                    ascend far on high, men would (seek to) follow him there.<span
                        class="rhetorical"> But how should he be willing to occupy himself with
                        other men?'</span></span>
            </p>



            <p>Shen-tu Jia was (another) man who had lost his feet. Along with Zi-chan of Zheng he
                studied under the master Bo-hun Wu-ren. Zi-chan said to him (one day), <span
                    class="speech" title="Zi-chan">'If I go out first, do you remain behind; and if
                    you go out first, I will remain behind.'</span> Next day they were again sitting
                together on the same mat in the hall, when Zi-chan said (again), <span
                    class="speech" title="Zi-Chan">'If I go out first, do you remain behind; and if
                    you go out first, I will remain behind. Now I am about to go out; will you stay
                    behind or not? Moreover, when you see one of official rank (like myself), you do
                    not try to get out of his way - do you consider yourself equal to one of
                    official rank?'</span> Shen-tu Jia replied, <span class="speech"
                    title="Shen-tu Jia">'In our Master's school is there indeed such recognition
                    required of official rank? You are one, Sir, whose pleasure is in your official
                    rank, and would therefore take precedence of other men. I have heard that when a
                    mirror is bright, the dust does not rest on it; when dust rests on it the mirror
                    is not bright. When one dwells long with a man of ability and virtue, he comes
                    to be without error. There now is our teacher whom you have chosen to make you
                    greater than you are; and when you still talk in this way, are you not in
                    error?'</span> Zi-chan rejoined, <span class="speech" title="Zi-chan">'A
                    (shattered) object as you are, you would still strive to make yourself out as
                    good as Yao! If I may form an estimate of your virtue, might it not be
                    sufficient to lead you to the examination of yourself?'</span> The other said,
                    <span class="speech" title="Shen-tu Jia">'Most criminals, in describing their
                    offences, would make it out that they ought not to have lost (their feet) for
                    them; few would describe them so as to make it appear that they should not have
                    preserved their feet. They are only the virtuous who know that such a calamity
                    was unavoidable, and therefore rest in it as what was appointed for them. When
                    men stand before (an archer like) Yi with his bent bow, if they are in the
                    middle of his field, that is the place where they should be hit; and if they be
                    not hit, that also was appointed. There are many with their feet entire who
                    laugh at me because I have lost my feet, which makes me feel vexed and angry.
                    But when I go to our teacher, I throw off that feeling, and return (to a better
                    mood) - he has washed, without my knowing it, the other from me by (his
                    instructions in) what is good. I have attended him now for nineteen years, and
                    have not known that I am without my feet. Now, you, Sir, and I have for the
                    object of our study the (virtue) which is internal, and not an adjunct of the
                    body, and yet you are continually directing your attention to my external body -
                    are you not wrong in this?'</span> Zi-chan felt uneasy, altered his manner and
                looks, and said, <span class="speech" title="Shen-tu Jia">'You need not, Sir, say
                    anything more about it.'</span></p>



            <p>In Lu there was a cripple, called Shu-shan the Toeless, who came on his heels to see
                Zhongni. Zhongni said to him, <span class="speech" title="Zhongni">'By your want of
                    circumspection in the past, Sir, you have incurred such a calamity; of what use
                    is your coming to me now?'</span> Toeless said, <span class="speech"
                    title="Toeless">'Through my ignorance of my proper business and taking too
                    little care of my body, I came to lose my feet. But now I am come to you, still
                    possessing what is more honourable than my feet, and which therefore I am
                    anxious to preserve entire. There is nothing which Heaven does not cover, and
                    nothing which Earth does not sustain; you, Master, were regarded by me as doing
                    the part of Heaven and Earth - how could I know that you would receive me in
                    such a way?'</span> Confucius rejoined, <span class="speech" title="Confucius"
                    >'I am but a poor creature. But why, my master, do you not come inside, where I
                    will try to tell you what I have learned?'</span> When Toeless had gone out,
                Confucius said, <span class="speech" title="Confucius">'Be stimulated to effort, my
                    disciples. This toeless cripple is still anxious to learn to make up for the
                    evil of his former conduct;-- how much more should those be so whose conduct has
                    been unchallenged!'</span> Mr. Toeless, however, told Lao Dan (of the
                interview), saying, <span class="speech" title="Toeless">'Kong Qiu, I apprehend, has
                    not yet attained to be a Perfect man. <span class="rhetorical">What has he to do
                        with keeping a crowd of disciples around him?</span> He is seeking to have
                    the reputation of being an extraordinary and marvellous man, and does not know
                    that the Perfect man considers this to be as handcuffs and fetters to
                    him.'</span> Lao Dan said, <span class="speech" title="Lao Dan">'Why did you not
                    simply lead him to see the unity of life and death, and that the admissible and
                    inadmissible belong to one category, so freeing him from his fetters? Would this
                    be possible?'</span> Toeless said, <span class="speech" title="Toeless">'It is
                    the punishment inflicted on him by Heaven. How can he be freed from it?'</span>
            </p>



            <p>Duke Ai of Lu asked Zhongni, saying, <span class="speech" title="Duke Ai">'There was
                    an ugly man in Wei, called Ai-tai Tuo. His father-in-law, who lived with him,
                    thought so much of him that he could not be away from him. His wife, when she
                    saw him (ugly as he was), represented to her parents, saying, "I had more than
                    ten times rather be his concubine than the wife of any other man." He was never
                    heard to take the lead in discussion, but always seemed to be of the same
                    opinion with others. He had not the position of a ruler, so as to be able to
                    save men from death. He had no revenues, so as to be able to satisfy men's
                    craving for food. He was ugly enough, moreover, to scare the whole world. He
                    agreed with men instead of trying to lead them to adopt his views; <span
                        class="figurative" style="hyperbole">his knowledge did not go beyond his
                        immediate neighbourhood</span>. And yet his father-in-law and his wife were
                    of one mind about him in his presence (as I have said) - he must have been
                    different from other men. I called him, and saw him. Certainly he was ugly
                    enough to scare the whole world. He had not lived with me, however, for many
                    months, when I was drawn to the man; and before he had been with me a full year,
                    I had confidence in him. The state being without a chief minister, I (was
                    minded) to commit the government to him. He responded to my proposal
                    sorrowfully, and looked undecided as if he would fain have declined it. I was
                    ashamed of myself (as inferior to him), but finally gave the government into his
                    hands. In a little time, however, he left me and went away. I was sorry and felt
                    that I had sustained a loss, and as if there were no other to share the
                    pleasures of the kingdom with me. What sort of man was he?'</span></p>

            <p> Zhongni said, <span class="speech" title="Zhongni">'Once when I was sent on a
                    mission to Qi, I saw some pigs sucking at their dead mother. After a little they
                    looked with rapid glances, when they all left her, and ran away. They felt that
                    she did not see them, and that she was no longer like themselves. What they had
                    loved in their mother was not her bodily figure, but what had given animation to
                    her figure. When a man dies in battle, they do not at his interment employ the
                    usual appendages of plumes: as to supplying shoes to one who has lost his feet,
                    there is no reason why he should care for them - in neither case is there the
                    proper reason for their use. The members of the royal harem do not pare their
                    nails nor pierce their ears; when a man is newly married, he remains (for a
                    time) absent from his official duties, and unoccupied with them. That their
                    bodies might be perfect was sufficient to make them thus dealt with; how much
                    greater results should be expected from men whose mental gifts are perfect! This
                    Ai-tai Tuo was believed by men, though he did not speak a word; and was loved by
                    them, though he did no special service for them. He made men appoint him to the
                    government of their states, afraid only that he would not accept the
                    appointment. He must have been a man whose powers were perfect, though his
                    realisation of them was not manifested in his person.</span></p>

            <p> Duke Ai said, <span class="speech" title="Duke Ai">'What is meant by saying that his
                    powers were complete?' Zhongni replied, 'Death and life, preservation and ruin,
                    failure and success, poverty and wealth, superiority and inferiority, blame and
                    praise, hunger and thirst, cold and heat; these are the changes of
                    circumstances, the operation of our appointed lot. Day and night they succeed to
                    one another before us, but there is no wisdom able to discover to what they owe
                    their origination. They are not sufficient therefore to disturb the harmony (of
                    the nature), and are not allowed to enter into the treasury of intelligence. To
                    cause this harmony and satisfaction ever to be diffused, while the feeling of
                    pleasure is not lost from the mind; to allow no break to arise in this state day
                    or night, so that it is always spring-time in his relations with external
                    things; in all his experiences to realise in his mind what is appropriate to
                    each season (of the year): these are the characteristics of him whose powers are
                    perfect.'</span></p>

            <p><span class="speech" title="Duke Ai"> 'And what do you mean by the realisation of
                    these powers not being manifested in the person?'</span> (pursued further the
                duke). The reply was, <span class="speech" title="Zhongni">'There is nothing so
                    level as the surface of a pool of still water. It may serve as an example of
                    what I mean. All within its circuit is preserved (in peace), and there comes to
                    it no agitation from without. The virtuous efficacy is the perfect cultivation
                    of the harmony (of the nature). Though the realisation of this be not manifested
                    in the person, things cannot separate themselves (from its
                influence).'</span></p>

            <p> Some days afterwards duke Ai told this conversation to Min-zi, saying, <span
                    class="speech" title="Duke Ai">'Formerly it seemed to me the work of the
                    sovereign to stand in court with his face to the south, to rule the kingdom, and
                    to pay good heed to the accounts of the people concerned, lest any should come
                    to a (miserable) death - this I considered to be the sum (of his duty). Now that
                    I have heard that description of the Perfect man, I fear that my idea is not the
                    real one, and that, by employing myself too lightly, I may cause the ruin of my
                    state. I and Kong Qiu are not on the footing of ruler and subject, but on that
                    of a virtuous friendship.'</span></p>



            <p>A person who had no lips, whose legs were bent so that he could only walk on his
                toes, and who was (otherwise) deformed, addressed his counsels to duke Ling of Wei,
                who was so pleased with him, that he looked on a perfectly formed man as having a
                lean and small neck in comparison with him. Another who had<span class="figurative"
                    style="simile"> a large goitre like an earthenware jar</span> addressed his
                counsels to duke Huan of Qi, who was so pleased with him that he looked on a
                perfectly formed man as having a neck lean and small in comparison with him. So it
                is that when one's virtue is extraordinary, (any deficiency in) his bodily form may
                be forgotten. When men do not forget what is (easily) forgotten, and forget what is
                not (easily) forgotten, we have a case of real oblivion. <span class="paradox"
                    >Therefore the sagely man has that in which his mind finds its enjoyment, and
                    (looks on) wisdom as (but) the shoots from an old stump</span>; <span
                    class="figurative" style="metaphor">agreements with others are to him but so
                    much glue</span>; <span class="figurative" style="metaphor">kindnesses are (but
                    the arts of) intercourse;</span> and great skill is (but as) merchants' wares.
                The sagely man lays no plans; <span class="rhetorical">of what use would wisdom be
                    to him?</span> He has no cutting and hacking to do; of <span class="rhetorical"
                    >what use would glue be to him?</span> He has lost nothing;<span
                    class="rhetorical"> of what use would arts of intercourse be to him?</span> He
                has no goods to dispose of; <span class="rhetorical">what need has he to play the
                    merchant? </span>(The want of) these four things are the nourishment of (his)
                Heavenly (nature); that nourishment is its Heavenly food. Since he receives this
                food from Heaven, <span class="rhetorical">what need has he for anything of man's
                    (devising)?</span> He has the bodily form of man, but not the passions and
                desires of (other) men. He has the form of man, and therefore he is a man. Being
                without the passions and desires of men, their approvings and disapprovings are not
                to be found in him. How insignificant and small is (the body) by which he belongs to
                humanity! How grand and great is he in the unique perfection of his Heavenly
                (nature)!</p>



            <p>Huizi said to Zhuangzi, <span class="speech" title="Huizi">'Can a man indeed be
                    without desires and passions?'</span> The reply was, <span class="speech"
                    title="Zhuangzi">'He can.' </span><span class="speech" title="Huizi">'But on
                    what grounds do you call him a man, who is thus without passions and
                    desires?'</span> Zhuangzi said, <span class="speech" title="Zhuangzi">'The Dao
                    gives him his personal appearance (and powers); Heaven gives him his bodily
                    form; how should we not call him a man?'</span> Huizi rejoined, <span
                    class="speech" title="Huizi"> 'Since you call him a man, how can he be without
                    passions and desires?'</span> The reply was, <span class="speech"
                    title="Zhuangzi">'You are misunderstanding what I mean by passions and desires.
                    What I mean when I say that he is without these is, that this man does not by
                    his likings and dislikings do any inward harm to his body - he always pursues
                    his course without effort, and does not (try to) increase his (store of)
                    life.'</span> Huizi rejoined, <span class="speech" title="Huizi">'If there were
                    not that increasing of (the amount) of life, how would he get his body?'</span>
                Zhuangzi said, <span class="speech" title="Zhuangzi">'The Dao gives him his personal
                    appearance (and powers); Heaven gives him his bodily form; and he does not by
                    his likings and dislikings do any internal harm to his body. But now you, Sir,
                    deal with your spirit as if it were something external to you, and subject your
                    vital powers to toil. You sing (your ditties), leaning against a tree; you go to
                    sleep, grasping the stump of a rotten dryandra tree. Heaven selected for you the
                    bodily form (of a man), and you babble about what is strong and what is
                    white.'</span></p>

        </section>
        <h1><a class="title" href="#contents" id="chapter6">Chapter 6:The Great and Most Honoured
                Master</a></h1>
        <section>


            <p><span class="paradox">He who knows the part which the Heavenly (in him) plays, and
                    knows (also) that which the Human (in him ought to) play, has reached the
                    perfection (of knowledge). He who knows the part which the Heavenly plays
                    (knows) that it is naturally born with him; he who knows the part which the
                    Human ought to play (proceeds) with the knowledge which he possesses to nourish
                    it in the direction of what he does not (yet) know: to complete one's natural
                    term of years and not come to an untimely end in the middle of his course is the
                    fulness of knowledge. Although it be so, there is an evil (attending this
                    condition). Such knowledge still awaits the confirmation of it as correct; it
                    does so because it is not yet determined. </span><span class="rhetorical">How do
                    we know that what we call the Heavenly (in us) is not the Human?</span>
                <span class="rhetorical">and that what we call the Human is not the Heavenly?</span>
                There must be the True man, and then there is the True knowledge. </p>

            <p><span class="rhetorical">What is meant by 'the True Man?'</span>
                <span class="paradox">The True men of old did not reject (the views of) the few;
                    they did not seek to accomplish (their ends) like heroes (before others); they
                    did not lay plans to attain those ends. Being such, though they might make
                    mistakes, they had no occasion for repentance; though they might succeed, they
                    had no self-complacency. Being such, they could ascend the loftiest heights
                    without fear; they could pass through water without being made wet by it; they
                    could go into fire without being burnt;</span> so it was that by their knowledge
                they ascended to and reached the Dao. </p>

            <p><span class="paradox">The True men of old did not dream when they slept, had no
                    anxiety when they awoke, and did not care that their food should be pleasant.
                    Their breathing came deep and silently. The breathing of the true man comes
                    (even) from his heels, while men generally breathe (only) from their throats.
                    When men are defeated in argument, their words come from their gullets as if
                    they were vomiting. Where lusts and desires are deep, the springs of the
                    Heavenly are shallow.</span>
            </p>

            <p>The True men of old knew nothing of the love of life or of the hatred of death.
                Entrance into life occasioned them no joy; the exit from it awakened no resistance.
                Composedly they went and came. They did not forget what their beginning bad been,
                and they did not inquire into what their end would be. They accepted (their life)
                and rejoiced in it; they forgot (all fear of death), and returned (to their state
                before life). Thus there was in them what is called the want of any mind to resist
                the Dao, and of all attempts by means of the Human to assist the Heavenly. Such were
                they who are called the True men. Being such, their minds were free from all
                thought; their demeanour was still and unmoved; <span class="figurative"
                    style="personification">their foreheads beamed simplicity.</span>
                <span class="figurative" style="simile">Whatever coldness came from them was like
                    that of autumn; whatever warmth came from them was like that of spring. Their
                    joy and anger assimilated to what we see in the four seasons.</span> They did in
                regard to all things what was suitable, and no one could know how far their action
                would go. Therefore the sagely man might, in his conduct of war, <span
                    class="paradox">destroy a state without losing the hearts of the people;</span>
                <span class="paradox">his benefits and favours might extend to a myriad generations
                    without his being a lover of men.</span> Hence he who tries to share his joys
                with others is not a sagely man; he who manifests affection is not benevolent; he
                who observes times and seasons (to regulate his conduct) is not a man of wisdom; he
                to whom profit and injury are not the same is not a superior man; he who acts for
                the sake of the name of doing so, and loses his (proper) self is not the (right)
                scholar; and he who throws away his person in a way which is not the true (way)
                cannot command the service of others. <em class="historical">Such men as Hu Bu-jie,
                    Wu Guang, Bo-yi, Shu-Qi, the count of Ji, Xu-yu, Ji Ta, and Shen-tu Di</em>, all
                did service for other men, and sought to secure for them what they desired, not
                seeking their own pleasure. </p>

            <p><span class="paradox"><span class="positive">The True men of old presented the aspect
                        of judging others aright, but without being partisans; of feeling their own
                        insufficiency, but being without flattery or cringing. Their peculiarities
                        were natural to them, but they were not obstinately attached to them; their
                        humility was evident, but there was nothing of unreality or display about
                        it. Their placidity and satisfaction had the appearance of joy; their every
                        movement seemed to be a necessity to them. Their accumulated attractiveness
                        drew men's looks to them; their blandness fixed men's attachment to their
                        virtue. They seemed to accommodate themselves to the (manners of their age),
                        but with a certain severity; their haughty indifference was beyond its
                        control. Unceasing seemed their endeavours to keep (their mouths) shut; when
                        they looked down, they had forgotten what they wished to say. They
                        considered punishments to be the substance (of government, and they never
                        incurred it); ceremonies to be its supporting wings (and they always
                        observed them); wisdom (to indicate) the time (for action, and they always
                        selected it); and virtue to be accordance (with others), and they were
                        all-accordant. Considering punishments to be the substance (of government),
                        yet their generosity appeared in the (manner of their) infliction of death.
                        Considering ceremonies to be its supporting wings, they pursued by means of
                        them their course in the world. Considering wisdom to indicate the time (for
                        action), they felt it necessary to employ it in (the direction of) affairs.
                        Considering virtue to be accordance (with others), they sought to ascend its
                        height along with all who had feet (to climb it). (Such were they), and yet
                        men really thought that they did what they did by earnest effort. In this
                        way they were one and the same in all their likings and dislikings. Where
                        they liked, they were the same; where they did not like, they were the same.
                        In the former case where they liked, they were fellow-workers with the
                        Heavenly (in them); in the latter where they disliked, they were co-workers
                        with the Human in them. The one of these elements (in their nature) did not
                        overcome the other. Such were those who are called the True
                    men.</span></span></p>



            <p>Death and life are ordained, just as we have the constant succession of night and day
                - in both cases from Heaven. Men have no power to do anything in reference to them -
                such is the constitution of things. There are those who specially regard Heaven as
                their father, and they still love It (distant as It is); how much more should they
                love That which stands out (Superior and Alone)! Some specially regard their ruler
                as superior to themselves, and will give their bodies to die for him; how much more
                should they do so for That which is their true (Ruler)! <span class="figurative"
                    style="metaphor">When the springs are dried up, the fishes collect together on
                    the land. Than that they should moisten one another there by the damp about
                    them, and keep one another wet by their slime, it would be better for them to
                    forget one another in the rivers and lakes.</span> And <em class="historical"
                    >when men praise Yao and condemn Jie</em>, it would be better to forget them
                both, and seek the renovation of the Dao.</p>

            <p>There is the great Mass (of nature) - I find the support of my body on it; my life is
                spent in toil on it; my old age seeks ease on it; at death I find rest in it - what
                makes my life a good makes my death also a good. If you hide away a boat in the
                ravine of a hill, and hide away the hill in a lake, you will say that (the boat) is
                secure; but at midnight there shall come a strong man and carry it off on his back,
                while you in the dark know nothing about it. You may hide away anything, whether
                small or great, in the most suitable place, and yet it shall disappear from it.
                    <span class="paradox">But if you could hide the world in the world, so that
                    there was nowhere to which it could be removed, this would be the grand reality
                    of the ever-during Thing.</span> When the body of man comes from its special
                mould, there is even then occasion for joy; but this body undergoes a myriad
                transformations, and does not immediately reach its perfection; <span
                    class="rhetorical">does it not thus afford occasion for joys
                    incalculable?</span> Therefore the sagely man enjoys himself in that from which
                there is no possibility of separation, and by which all things are preserved. He
                considers early death or old age, his beginning and his ending, all to be good, and
                in this other men imitate him; how much more will they do so in regard to That
                Itself on which all things depend, and from which every transformation arises!</p>



            <p>This is the Dao; <span class="paradox">there is in It emotion and sincerity, but It
                    does nothing and has no bodily form. It may be handed down (by the teacher), but
                    may not be received (by his scholars). It may be apprehended (by the mind), but
                    It cannot be seen. It has Its root and ground (of existence) in Itself.</span>
                Before there were heaven and earth, from of old, there It was, securely existing.
                From It came the mysterious existences of spirits, from It the mysterious existence
                of God. <span class="paradox">It produced heaven; It produced earth. It was before
                    the Tai-ji, and yet could not be considered high</span>;<span class="paradox">
                    It was below all space, and yet could not be considered deep.</span>
                <span class="paradox">It was produced before heaven and earth, and yet could not be
                    considered to have existed long;</span>
                <span class="paradox">It was older than the highest antiquity, and yet could not be
                    considered old.</span><em class="historical"> Shi-wei got It, and by It adjusted
                    heaven and earth. Fu-xi got It, and by It penetrated to the mystery of the
                    maternity of the primary matter. The Wei-dou got It, and from all antiquity has
                    made no eccentric movement. The Sun and Moon got It, and from all antiquity have
                    not intermitted (their bright shining). Kan-pei got It, and by It became lord of
                    Kun-lun. Feng-yi got It, and by It enjoyed himself in the Great River. Jian-wu
                    got It, and by It dwelt on mount Tai. Huang-di got It, and by It ascended the
                    cloudy sky. Zhuan-xu got It, and by It dwelt in the Dark Palace. Yu-jiang got
                    It, and by It was set on the North Pole. Xi Wang-mu got It, and by It had her
                    seat in (the palace of) Shao-guang. No one knows Its beginning; no one knows Its
                    end. Peng Zu got It, and lived on from the time of the lord of Yu to that of the
                    Five Chiefs. Fu Yue got It, and by It became chief minister to Wu-ding, (who
                    thus) in a trice became master of the kingdom. (After his death), Fu Yue mounted
                    to the eastern portion of the Milky Way, where, riding on Sagittarius and
                    Scorpio, he took his place among the stars.</em></p>



            <p>Nan-bo Zi-kui asked Nu Yu, saying, <span class="speech" title="Nan-bo Zi-kui">'You
                    are old, Sir, while <span class="figurative" style="simile">your complexion is
                        like that of a child</span>; how is it so?'</span> The reply was, <span
                    class="speech" title="Nu Yu">'I have become acquainted with the Dao.'</span> The
                other said, <span class="speech" title="Nan-bo Zi-kui">'Can I learn the Dao?'</span>
                Nu Yu said, <span class="speech" title="Nu Yu">'No. <span class="rhetorical">How can
                        you?</span> You, Sir, are not the man to do so. There was Bu-liang Yi who
                    had the abilities of a sagely man, but not the Dao, while I had the Dao, but not
                    the abilities. I wished, however, to teach him, if, peradventure, he might
                    become the sagely man indeed. If he should not do so, it was easy (I thought)
                    for one possessing the Dao of the sagely man to communicate it to another
                    possessing his abilities. Accordingly, I proceeded to do so, but with
                    deliberation. After three days, he was able to banish from his mind all worldly
                    (matters). This accomplished, I continued my intercourse with him in the same
                    way; and in seven days he was able to banish from his mind all thought of men
                    and things. This accomplished, and my instructions continued, after nine days,
                    he was able to count his life as foreign to himself. This accomplished, his mind
                    was afterwards clear as the morning; and after this he was able to see his own
                    individuality. That individuality perceived, he was able to banish all thought
                    of Past or Present. Freed from this, he was able to penetrate to (the truth that
                    there is no difference between) life and death - (how) the destruction of life
                    is not dying, and the communication of other life is not living. (The Dao) is a
                    thing which accompanies all other things and meets them, which is present when
                    they are overthrown and when they obtain their completion. Its name is
                    Tranquillity amid all Disturbances, meaning that such Disturbances lead to Its
                    Perfection.'</span></p>

            <p><span class="speech" title="Nan-bo Zi-kui">'And how did you, being alone (without any
                    teacher), learn all this?'</span>
                <span class="speech" title="Nu Yu">'I learned it,'</span> was the reply, <span
                    class="speech" title="Nu Yu">'from the son of Fu-mo; he learned it from the
                    grandson of Luo-song; he learned it from Zhan-ming; he learned it from Nie-xu;
                    he, from Xu-yu; he, from Ou; he, from Xuan-ming; he, from Shen-liao; and he
                    learned it from Yi-shi.'</span></p>



            <p>Zi-si, Zi-yu, Zi-li, and Zi-lai, these four men, were talking together, when some one
                said, <span class="speech" title="Zi-si, Zi-yu, Zi-li, or Zi-lai"><span
                        class="rhetorical">'Who can suppose the head to be made from nothing, the
                        spine from life, and the rump-bone from death?</span>
                    <span class="rhetorical">Who knows how death and birth, living on and
                        disappearing, compose the one body?</span> I would be friends with
                    him.'</span> The four men looked at one another and laughed, but no one seized
                with his mind the drift of the questions. All, however, were friends together. Not
                long after Zi-yu fell ill, and Zi-si went to inquire for him. <span class="speech"
                    title="Zi-yu">'How great,'</span> said (the sufferer), <span class="speech"
                    title="Zi-yu">'is the Creator! That He should have made me the deformed object
                    that I am!'</span> He was a crooked hunchback; his five viscera were squeezed
                into the upper part of his body; his chin bent over his navel; his shoulder was
                higher than his crown; on his crown was an ulcer pointing to the sky; his breath
                came and went in gasps: yet he was easy in his mind, and made no trouble of his
                condition. He limped to a well, looked at himself in it, and said, <span
                    class="speech" title="Zi-yu">'Alas that the Creator should have made me the
                    deformed object that I am!'</span> Si said, <span class="speech" title="Si">'Do
                    you dislike your condition?'</span> He replied, <span class="speech"
                    title="Zi-yu">'<span class="rhetorical">No, why should I dislike it?</span> If
                    He were to transform my left arm into a cock, I should be watching with it the
                    time of the night; if He were to transform my right arm into a cross-bow, I
                    should then be looking for a Xiao to (bring down and) roast; if He were to
                    transform my rump-bone into a wheel, and my spirit into a horse, I should then
                    be mounting it, and would not change it for another steed. Moreover, when we
                    have got (what we are to do), there is the time (of life) in which to do it;
                    when we lose that (at death), submission (is what is required). When we rest in
                    what the time requires, and manifest that submission, neither joy nor sorrow can
                    find entrance (to the mind). This would be what the ancients called loosing the
                    cord by which (the life) is suspended. But one hung up cannot loose himself;--
                    he is held fast by his bonds. And that creatures cannot overcome Heaven (the
                    inevitable) is a long-acknowledged fact - <span class="rhetorical">why should I
                        hate my condition?</span>'</span></p>

            <p>Before long Zi-lai fell ill, and lay gasping at the point of death, while his wife
                and children stood around him wailing. Zi-li went to ask for him, and said to them,
                    <span class="speech" title="Zi-li">'Hush! Get out of the way! Do not disturb him
                    as he is passing through his change.'</span> Then, leaning against the door, he
                said (to the dying man), <span class="speech" title="Zi-li">'Great indeed is the
                    Creator! <span class="rhetorical">What will He now make you to become? Where
                        will He take you to? Will He make you the liver of a rat, or the arm of an
                        insect?</span></span> Zi-lai replied, <span class="speech" title="Zi-lai"
                    >'Wherever a parent tells a son to go, east, west, south, or north, he simply
                    follows the command. The Yin and Yang are more to a man than his parents are. If
                    they are hastening my death, and I do not quietly submit to them, I shall be
                    obstinate and rebellious. There is the great Mass (of nature);-- I find the
                    support of my body in it; my life is spent in toil on it; my old age seeks ease
                    on it; at death I find rest on it: what has made my life a good will make my
                    death also a good. Here now is a great founder, casting his metal. If the metal
                    were to leap up (in the pot), and say, "I must be made into a (sword like the)
                    Mo-ye," the great founder would be sure to regard it as uncanny. So, again, when
                    a form is being fashioned in the mould of the womb, if it were to say, "I must
                    become a man; I must become a man," the Creator would be sure to regard it as
                    uncanny. When we once understand that heaven and earth are a great melting-pot,
                    and the Creator a great founder, <span class="rhetorical">where can we have to
                        go to that shall not be right for us?</span> We are born as from a quiet
                    sleep, and we die to a calm awaking.'</span></p>



            <p>Zi-sang Hu, Meng Zi-fan, and Zi-qin Zhang, these three men, were friends together.
                (One of them said), <span class="speech"
                    title="Zi-sang Hu, Meng Zi-fan, or Zi-qin Zhang"><span class="rhetorical">'Who
                        can associate together without any (thought of) such association, or act
                        together without any (evidence of) such co-operation? </span><span
                        class="rhetorical">Who can mount up into the sky and enjoy himself amidst
                        the mists, disporting beyond the utmost limits (of things), and forgetting
                        all others as if this were living, and would have no end?</span>'</span> The
                three men looked at one another and laughed, not perceiving the drift of the
                questions; and they continued to associate together as friends. Suddenly, after a
                time, Zi-sang Hu died. Before he was buried, Confucius heard of the event, and sent
                Zi-gong to go and see if he could render any assistance. One of the survivors had
                composed a ditty, and the other was playing on his lute. Then they sang together in
                unison,</p>

            <p><span class="speech" title="Meng Zi-fan and Zi-qin Zhang">'Ah! come, Sang Hu! ah!
                    come, Sang Hu! Your being true you've got again, While we, as men, still here
                    remain Ohone!'</span></p>

            <p>Zi-gong hastened forward to them, and said, <span class="speech" title="Zi-gong">'I
                    venture to ask whether it be according to the rules to be singing thus in the
                    presence of the corpse?'</span> The two men looked at each other, and laughed,
                saying, 'What does this man know about the idea that underlies (our) rules?' Zi-gong
                returned to Confucius, and reported to him, saying, <span class="speech"
                    title="Meng Zi-fan and Zi-qin Zhang">'What sort of men are those? They had made
                    none of the usual preparations, and treated the body as a thing foreign to them.
                    They were singing in the presence of the corpse, and there was no change in
                    their countenances. I cannot describe them; what sort of men are they?'</span>
                Confucius replied, <span class="speech" title="Confucius">'Those men occupy and
                    enjoy themselves in what is outside the (common) ways (of the world), while I
                    occupy and enjoy myself in what lies within those ways. There is no common
                    ground for those of such different ways; and when I sent you to condole with
                    those men, I was acting stupidly. They, moreover, make man to be the fellow of
                    the Creator, and seek their enjoyment in the formless condition of heaven and
                    earth. They consider life to be an appendage attached, an excrescence annexed to
                    them, and death to be a separation of the appendage and a dispersion of the
                    contents of the excrescence. With these views, <span class="rhetorical">how
                        should they know wherein death and life are to be found, or what is first
                        and what is last?</span> They borrow different substances, and pretend that
                    the common form of the body is composed of them. They dismiss the thought of
                    (its inward constituents like) the liver and gall, and (its outward
                    constituents), the ears and eyes. Again and again they end and they begin,
                    having no knowledge of first principles. They occupy themselves ignorantly and
                    vaguely with what (they say) lies outside the dust and dirt (of the world), and
                    seek their enjoyment in the business of doing nothing. <span class="rhetorical"
                        >How should they confusedly address themselves to the ceremonies practised
                        by the common people, and exhibit themselves as doing so to the ears and
                        eyes of the multitude?'</span></span></p>

            <p>Zi-gong said, <span class="speech" title="Zi-gong">'Yes, but why do you, Master, act
                    according to the (common) ways (of the world)?'</span> The reply was, <span
                    class="speech" title="Confucius">'I am in this under the condemning sentence of
                    Heaven. Nevertheless, I will share with you (what I have attained to).'</span>
                Zi-gong rejoined, <span class="speech" title="Zi-gong">'I venture to ask the method
                    which you pursue;'</span> and Confucius said, <span class="speech"
                    title="Confucius">'Fishes breed and grow in the water; man developes in the Dao.
                    Growing in the water, <span class="figurative" style="personification">the
                        fishes cleave the pools</span>, and their nourishment is supplied to them.
                    Developing in the Dao, men do nothing, and the enjoyment of their life is
                    secured. Hence it is said, "Fishes forget one another in the rivers and lakes;
                    men forget one another in the arts of the Dao."'</span> Zi-gong said, <span
                    class="speech" title="Zi-gong">'I venture to ask about the man who stands aloof
                    from others.'</span> The reply was, <span class="speech" title="Confucius">'He
                    stands aloof from other men, but he is in accord with Heaven! Hence it is said,
                    "The small man of Heaven is the superior man among men; the superior man among
                    men is the small man of Heaven!"'</span>
            </p>



            <p> Yan Hui asked Zhongni, saying, <span class="speech" title="Yan Hui">'When the mother
                    of Meng-sun Cai died, in all his wailing for her he did not shed a tear; in the
                    core of his heart he felt no distress; during all the mourning rites, he
                    exhibited no sorrow. Without these three things, he (was considered to have)
                    discharged his mourning well; is it that in the state of Lu one who has not the
                    reality may yet get the reputation of having it? I think the matter very
                    strange.'</span> Zhongni said, <span class="speech" title="Zhongni">'That
                    Meng-sun carried out (his views) to the utmost. He was advanced in knowledge;
                    but (in this case) <span class="paradox">it was not possible for him to appear
                        to be negligent (in his ceremonial observances)', but he succeeded in being
                        really so to himself</span>. Meng-sun does not know either what purposes
                    life serves, or what death serves; he does not know which should be first
                    sought, and which last. If he is to be transformed into something else, he will
                    simply await the transformation which he does not yet know. This is all he does.
                    And moreover, when one is about to undergo his change, <span class="rhetorical"
                        >how does he know that it has not taken place?</span> And <span
                        class="rhetorical">when he is not about to undergo his change, how does he
                        know that it has taken place?</span> Take the case of me and you: <span
                        class="rhetorical">are we in a dream from which we have not begun to
                        awake?</span> Moreover, Meng-sun presented in his body the appearance of
                    being agitated, but in his mind he was conscious of no loss. <span
                        class="figurative" style="simile">The death was to him like the issuing from
                        one's dwelling at dawn</span>, and no (more terrible) reality. He was more
                    awake than others were. When they wailed, he also wailed, having in himself the
                    reason why he did so. And we all have our individuality which makes us what we
                    are as compared together; <span class="rhetorical">but how do we know that we
                        determine in any case correctly that individuality?</span> Moreover you
                    dream that you are a bird, and seem to be soaring to the sky; or that you are a
                    fish, and seem to be diving in the deep. But you do not know whether we that are
                    now speaking are awake or in a dream. It is not the meeting with what is
                    pleasurable that produces the smile; it is not the smile suddenly produced that
                    produces the arrangement (of the person). When one rests in what has been
                    arranged, and puts away all thought of the transformation, he is in unity with
                    the mysterious Heaven.'</span></p>



            <p> Yi-er Zi having gone to see Xu You, the latter said to him, <span class="speech"
                    title="Xu You">'What benefit have you received from Yao?'</span> The reply was,
                    <span class="speech" title="Yi-er Zi">'Yao says to me, You must yourself labour
                    at benevolence and righteousness, and be able to tell clearly which is right and
                    which wrong (in conflicting statements).'</span> Xu You rejoined, <span
                    class="speech" title="Xu You">'Why then have you come to me? Since Yao has put
                    on you the brand of his benevolence and righteousness, and cut off your nose
                    with his right and wrong, how will you be able to wander in the way of aimless
                    enjoyment, of unregulated contemplation, and the ever-changing forms (of
                    dispute)?'</span> Yi-er Zi said, <span class="speech" title="Yi-er Zi">'That may
                    be; but I should like to skirt along its hedges.'</span>
                <span class="speech" title="Xu You">'But,'</span> said the other, <span
                    class="speech" title="Xu You">'it cannot be. Eyes without pupils can see nothing
                    of the beauty of the eyebrows, eyes, and other features; the blind have nothing
                    to do with the green, yellow, and variegated colours of the sacrificial
                    robes.'</span> Yi-er Zi rejoined, <span class="speech" title="Yi-er Zi">'Yet,
                    when Wu-zhuang lost his beauty, Ju-liang his strength, and Huang-Di his wisdom,
                    they all (recovered them) under the moulding (of your system) - how do you know
                    that the Maker will not obliterate the marks of my branding, and supply my
                    dismemberment, so that, again perfect in my form, I may follow you as my
                    teacher?'</span> Xu You said, <span class="speech" title="Xu You">'Ah! that
                    cannot yet be known. I will tell you the rudiments. 0 my Master! 0 my Master! He
                    gives to all things their blended qualities, and does not count it any
                    righteousness; His favours reach to all generations, and He does not count it
                    any benevolence; He is more ancient than the highest antiquity, and does not
                    count Himself old; He overspreads heaven and supports the earth; He carves and
                    fashions all bodily forms, and does not consider it any act of skill;-- this is
                    He in whom I find my enjoyment.'</span>
            </p>



            <p>Yan Hui said, <span class="speech" title="Yan Hui">'I am making progress.'</span>
                Zhongni replied, <span class="speech" title="Zhongni">'What do you mean?'</span>
                <span class="speech" title="Yan Hui">'I have ceased to think of benevolence and
                    righteousness,'</span> was the reply. <span class="speech" title="Zhongni">'Very
                    well; but that is not enough.'</span> Another day, Hui again saw Zhongni, and
                said, <span class="speech" title="Yan Hui">'I am making progress.'</span>
                <span class="speech" title="Zhongni">'What do you mean?'</span>
                <span class="speech" title="Yan Hui">'I have lost all thought of ceremonies and
                    music.'</span>
                <span class="speech" title="Zhongni">'Very well, but that is not enough.'</span> A
                third day, Hui again saw (the Master), and said, <span class="speech"
                    title="Yan Hui">'I am making progress.'</span>
                <span class="speech" title="Zhongni">'What do you mean?'</span><span class="speech"
                    title="Yan Hui"> 'I sit and forget everything.'</span> Zhongni changed
                countenance, and said, <span class="speech" title="Zhongni">'What do you mean by
                    saying that you sit and forget (everything)?'</span> Yan Hui replied, <span
                    class="speech" title="Yan Hui">'My connexion with the body and its parts is
                    dissolved; my perceptive organs are discarded. Thus leaving my material form,
                    and bidding farewell to my knowledge, I am become one with the Great Pervader.
                    This I call sitting and forgetting all things.'</span> Zhongni said, <span
                    class="speech" title="Zhongni">'One (with that Pervader), you are free from all
                    likings; so transformed, you are become impermanent. You have, indeed, become
                    superior to me! I must ask leave to follow in your steps.'</span></p>



            <p>Zi-yu and Zi-sang were friends. (Once), when it had rained continuously for ten days,
                Zi-yu said, <span class="speech" title="Zi-yu">'I fear that Zi-sang may be in
                    distress.'</span> So he wrapped up some rice, and went to give it to him to eat.
                When he came to Zi-sang's door, there issued from it sounds between singing and
                wailing; a lute was struck, and there came the words,<span class="speech"
                    title="Zi-sang"> '0 Father! 0 Mother! 0 Heaven! 0 Men!'</span> The voice could
                not sustain itself, and the line was hurriedly pronounced. Zi-yu entered and said,
                    <span class="speech" title="Zi-yu">'Why are you singing, Sir, this line of
                    poetry in such a way?'</span> The other replied, <span class="speech"
                    title="Zi-sang">'I was thinking, and thinking in vain, how it was that I was
                    brought to such extremity.<span class="rhetorical"> Would my parents have wished
                        me to be so poor?</span> Heaven overspreads all without any partial feeling,
                    and so does Earth sustain all; <span class="rhetorical"><span class="figurative"
                            style="personification">Would Heaven and Earth make me so poor with any
                            unkindly feeling?</span></span> I was trying to find out who had done
                    it, and I could not do so. But here I am in this extremity - it is what was
                    appointed for me!'</span></p>

        </section>
        <h1><a class="title" href="#contents" id="chapter7">Chapter 7:The Normal Course for Rulers
                and Kings</a></h1>
        <section>


            <p>Nie Que put four questions to Wang Ni, not one of which did he know (how to answer).
                On this Nie Que leaped up, and in great delight walked away and informed Yu-yi Zi of
                it, who said to him, <span class="speech" title="Yuyizi">'Do you (only) now know
                    it?' He of the line of <em class="historical">Yu</em> was not equal to him of
                    the line of <em class="historical">Tai</em>. He of Yu still kept in himself (the
                    idea of) benevolence by which to constrain (the submission of) men; and he did
                    win men, but he had not begun to proceed by what did not belong to him as a man.
                    He of the line of Tai would sleep tranquilly, and awake in contented simplicity.
                    He would consider himself now (merely) as a horse, and now (merely) as an ox.
                    His knowledge was real and untroubled by doubts; and his virtue was very true:
                    he had not begun to proceed by what belonged to him as a man.'</span></p>



            <p>Jian Wu went to see the mad (recluse), Jie-yu, who said to him, <span class="speech"
                    title="Jieyu">'What did <em class="historical">Ri-Zhong Shi</em> tell
                    you?'</span> The reply was, <span class="speech" title="Jianwu">'He told me that
                    when rulers gave forth their regulations according to their own views and
                    enacted righteous measures, no one would venture not to obey them, and all would
                    be transformed.'</span> Jie-yu said, <span class="speech" title="Jieyu">'That is
                    but the hypocrisy of virtue. For the right ordering of the world it would be
                    like trying to wade through the sea and dig through the He, or employing a
                    mosquito to carry a mountain on its back. And when a sage is governing, does he
                    govern men's outward actions? He is (himself) correct, and so (his government)
                    goes on; this is the simple and certain way by which he secures the success of
                    his affairs. <span class="figurative" style="metaphor">Think of the bird which
                        flies high, to avoid being hurt by the dart on the string of the archer, and
                        the little mouse which makes its hole deep under Shen-qiu to avoid the
                        danger of being smoked or dug out; are (rulers) less knowing than these two
                        little creatures?'</span></span></p>



            <p>Tian Gen, rambling on the south of <em class="geographic">(mount) Yin</em>, came to
                the neighbourhood of the <em class="geographic">Liao-water</em>. Happening there to
                meet with the man whose name is not known, he put a question to him, saying, <span
                    class="speech" title="Tiangen">'I beg to ask what should be done in order to
                    (carry on) the government of the world.'</span> The nameless man said, <span
                    class="speech" title="The nameless man">'Go away; you are a rude borderer. Why
                    do you put to me a question for which you are unprepared? I would simply play
                    the part of the Maker of (all) things. When wearied, I would mount on the bird
                    of the light and empty air, proceed beyond the six cardinal points, and wander
                    in the region of nonentity, to dwell in the wilderness of desert space. What
                    method have you, moreover, for the government of the world that you (thus)
                    agitate my mind?'</span> (Tian Gen), however, again asked the question, and the
                nameless man said, <span class="speech" title="Tiangen">'Let your mind find its
                    enjoyment in pure simplicity; blend yourself with (the primary) ether in idle
                    indifference; allow all things to take their natural course; and admit no
                    personal or selfish consideration - do this and the world will be
                    governed.'</span></p>



            <p>Yang Zi-ju, having an interview with Lao Dan, said to him, <span class="speech"
                    title="Yangziju">'<span class="positive">Here is a man, alert and vigorous in
                        responding to all matters, clearsighted and widely intelligent, and an
                        unwearied student of the Dao - can he be compared to one of the intelligent
                        kings?'</span></span> The reply was, <span class="speech" title="Laodan"
                        >'<span class="negative">Such a man is to one of the intelligent kings but
                        as the bustling underling of a court who toils his body and distresses his
                        mind with his various contrivances. And moreover, it is the beauty of the
                        skins of the tiger and leopard which makes men hunt them; the agility of the
                        monkey, or (the sagacity of) the dog that catches the yak, which make men
                        lead them in strings; but can one similarly endowed be compared to the
                        intelligent kings?'</span></span> Yang Zi-ju looked discomposed and said,
                    <span class="speech" title="Yangziju">'I venture to ask you what the government
                    of the intelligent kings is.'</span> Lao Dan replied, <span class="speech"
                    title="Laodan">'<span class="positive">In the governing of the intelligent
                        kings, their services overspread all under the sky, but they did not seem to
                        consider it as proceeding from themselves; their transforming influence
                        reached to all things, but the people did not refer it to them with hope. No
                        one could tell the name of their agency, but they made men and things be
                        joyful in themselves. Where they took their stand could not be fathomed, and
                        they found their enjoyment in (the realm of) nonentity.'</span></span></p>



            <p>In Zheng there was a mysterious wizard called Ji-xian. He knew all about the deaths
                and births of men, their preservation and ruin, their misery and happiness, and
                whether their lives would be long or short, foretelling the year, the month, the
                decade and the day like a spirit. When the people of Kang saw him, they all ran out
                of his way. Liezi went to see him, and was fascinated by him. Returning, he told
                Hu-zi of his interview, and said, <span class="speech" title="Liezi">'I considered
                    your doctrine, my master, to be perfect, but I have found another which is
                    superior to it.'</span> Hu-zi replied, <span class="speech" title="Huzi">'I have
                    communicated to you but the outward letter of my doctrine, and have not
                    communicated its reality and spirit; and do you think that you are in possession
                    of it? However many hens there be, if there be not the cock among them, how
                    should they lay (real) eggs? When you confront the world with your doctrine, you
                    are sure to show in your countenance (all that is in your mind), and so enable
                    (this) man to succeed in interpreting your physiognomy. Try and come to me with
                    him, that I may show myself to him.'</span> On the morrow, accordingly, Liezi
                came with the man and saw Hu-zi. When they went out, the wizard said, <span
                    class="speech" title="Ji-xian">'Alas! your master is a dead man. He will not
                    live;-- not for ten days more! I saw something strange about him - I saw the
                    ashes (of his life) all slaked with water!'</span> When Liezi reentered, he wept
                till the front of his jacket was wet with his tears, and told Hu-zi what the man had
                said.</p>

            <p>Hu-zi said, <span class="speech" title="Huzi">'I showed myself to him with the forms
                    of (vegetation beneath) the earth. There were the sprouts indeed, but without
                    (any appearance of) growth or regularity:-- he seemed to see me with the springs
                    of my (vital) power closed up. Try and come to me with him again.'</span> Next
                day, accordingly, Liezi brought the man again and saw Hu-zi. When they went out, the
                man said, <span class="speech" title="the wizard">'It is a fortunate thing for your
                    master that he met with me. He will get better; he has all the signs of living!
                    I saw the balance (of the springs of life) that had been stopped (inclining in
                    his favour).'</span> Liezi went in, and reported these words to his master, who
                said, <span class="speech" title="Huzi">'I showed myself to him after the pattern of
                    the earth (beneath the) sky. Neither semblance nor reality entered (into my
                    exhibition), but the springs (of life) were issuing from beneath my feet;-- he
                    seemed to see me with the springs of vigorous action in full play. Try and come
                    with him again.'</span> Next day Liezi came with the man again, and again saw
                Hu-zi with him. When they went out, the wizard said, <span class="speech"
                    title="Ji-xian">'Your master is never the same. I cannot understand his
                    physiognomy. Let him try to steady himself, and I will again view him.'</span>
                Liezi went in and reported this to Hu-zi, who said, <span class="speech"
                    title="Huzi">'This time I showed myself to him after the pattern of the grand
                    harmony (of the two elemental forces), with the superiority inclining to
                    neither. He seemed to see me with the springs of (vital) power in equal balance.
                    Where the water wheels about from (the movements of) a dugong, there is an
                    abyss; where it does so from the arresting (of its course), there is an abyss;
                    where it does so, and the water keeps flowing on, there is an abyss. There are
                    nine abysses with their several names, and I have only exhibited three of them.
                    Try and come with him again.'</span> Next day they came, and they again saw
                Hu-zi. But before he had settled himself in his position, the wizard lost himself
                and ran away. <span class="speech" title="Huzi">'Pursue him,'</span> said Hu-zi, and
                Liezi did so, but could not come up with him. He returned, and told Hu-zi, saying,
                    <span class="speech" title="Liezi">'There is an end of him; he is lost; I could
                    not find him.'</span></p>

            <p>Hu-zi rejoined, <span class="speech" title="Huzi">'I was showing him myself after the
                    pattern of what was before I began to come from my author. I confronted him with
                    pure vacancy, and an easy indifference. He did not know what I meant to
                    represent. Now he thought it was the idea of exhausted strength, and now that of
                    an onward flow, and therefore he ran away.'</span> After this, Liezi considered
                that he had not yet begun to learn (his master's doctrine). He returned to his
                house, and for three years did not go out. He did the cooking for his wife. He fed
                the pigs as if he were feeding men. He took no part or interest in occurring
                affairs. He put away the carving and sculpture about him, and returned to pure
                simplicity. Like a clod of earth he stood there in his bodily presence. Amid all
                distractions he was (silent) and shut up in himself. And in this way he continued to
                the end of his life.</p>



            <p><span class="comparison">Non-action (makes its exemplifier) the lord of all fame;
                    non-action (serves him as) the treasury of all plans; non-action (fits him for)
                    the burden of all offices; non-action (makes him) the lord of all wisdom. The
                    range of his action is inexhaustible, but there is nowhere any trace of his
                    presence. He fulfils all that he has received from Heaven, but he does not see
                    that he was the recipient of anything. A pure vacancy (of all purpose) is what
                    characterises him. When the perfect man employs his mind, it is a mirror.</span>
                It conducts nothing and anticipates nothing; it responds to (what is before it), but
                does not retain it. Thus he is able to deal successfully with all things, and
                injures none.</p>



            <p>The Ruler of the Southern Ocean was Shu, the Ruler of the Northern Ocean was Hu, and
                the Ruler of the Centre was Chaos. Shu and Hu were continually meeting in the land
                of Chaos, who treated them very well. They consulted together how they might repay
                his kindness, and said, <span class="speech" title="Shu and Hu">'Men all have seven
                    orifices for the purpose of seeing, hearing, eating, and breathing, while this
                    (poor) Ruler alone has not one. Let us try and make them for him.' Accordingly
                    they dug one orifice in him every day; and at the end of seven days Chaos
                    died.</span></p>

        </section>
    </body>
</html>
